-What is Babylon doing in the End Times?-

     When we first started this study, Matthew 24: 36-39 was used as the started point because our Lord Jesus had told His disciples; "...But as the days of Noah were, so also will the coming of the Son of Man be,...", and now, in a number of places in Revelation, the name of the ancient city of  Babylon is showing up. (Chapters; 14: 7-9; 16:17-19; 17:1-6; scattered throughout chapter 18:1 to chapter 19:3.) It (or she) is a central target for God's wrath and fury. In the Genesis account of the time before the flood, there is no mention of Babylon, or any other cities for that matter, but now it is a major issue for the end times. It might be a good idea to go back to the time before the flood and see what it was about 'Babylon the Great' caused God to; "...and God remembered Babylon the Great and made her drink the wine from the cup of his raging fury." (Rev. 16:19)
     The ancient city of Babylon is located in the country of Iraq, roughly 60 miles south of Bagdad, the capital of Iraq. It is a city that has been a wealth of information concerning the beginning of  early civilizations for both secular and Biblical archaeologists. Many of the discoveries found in the Mesopotamian area include the cultures of the Sumerian, Babylonian and Egyptian dynasties. According to research of the archaeologists, both secular and Biblical, the Sumerian and Babylonian cultures seem to have been  the oldest. With some variation these civilizations can be dated as far back as (approx.) 3,000 to 4,000 B.C.. This rough dating puts them in the exact time between the fall of man and the flood of Noah. (for more information see: Light from the Ancient Past; By; Jack Finegan.(1947 ed.) and Archaeology and the Old Testament; by Merrill F. Unger. (1973 ed.) or others of your own choosing.)
     One of the questions that has been difficult to explain, has been the rapid decline in man's moral and spiritual life after the fall. In Adam Clarke's Commentary; (1884 edition; Phillips and Hunt, New York) there is an interesting depiction of this decline of man that is worth including in this study.
     (Quote from: Adam Clarke's Commentary concerning the beginnings of Idolatry. This item was written in an older form of English. It's style and spelling is one that is not used today)
     Genesis chapter 4 verse 26; 
"And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name
Enos then began men to call upon the name of the Lord."
Verse 26. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.]  The marginal reading is, Then began men to call themselves by the name of the Lord; which words are supposed to signify that in the time of Enos the true followers of God began to distinguish themselves, and to be distinguished by others, by the appellation of sons of God; those of the other branch of Adam's family, among whom the Divine worship was not observed, being distinguished by the name, children of men. It must not be dissembled that many eminent men have contended that (Hebrew spelling of) 'huchal', which we translate began, should be rendered began profanely, or then profanation began, and from this time they date the origin of idolatry.  Most of the Jewish doctors were of this opinion, and Maimonides has discussed it at some length in his Treatise on Idolatry; as this piece is curious, and gives the most probable account of the origin and progress of idolatry, I shall insert it here.
     "In the days of Enos the sons of Adam erred with great error, and the counsel of the wise men of that age became brutish, and Enos himself was (one) of  them that erred; and their error was this: they said, For as much as God  hath created these stars and spheres to govern the world, and set them on high, and imparted honour unto them, and they are ministers that minister before him; it is meet that men should laud, and glorify, and give them honour. For this is the will of God, that we magnify and honour whomsoever he magifieth and honoureth; even as a king would have them honoured that stand before him, and this is the honour of the king himself. When this thing was come up into their hearts they began to build temples unto the stars, and to offer sacrifice unto them, and to laud and glorify them with words, and  to worship before them, that they might in their evil opinion obtain favour of the Creator; and 

this was the root of idolatry, &c. And in process of time there stood up false prophets among the sons of Adam, which said that God had commanded and said to them, Worship such a star, or all the stars, and do sacrifice unto them thus and thus; and built a temple for it, and make an image of it, that all the people, women and children may worship it. And the false prophet showed them the image which he had feigned out of his own heart, and said it was the image of such a star, which was made known unto him by prophecy. And they began after this manner to make images in temples, and under trees, and on tops of mountains and hills, and assembled together and worshipped them, &c. And this thing was spread through all the world, to serve images with services different one from another, and to sacrifice unto and worship them. So, in process of time, the glorious and fearful name (of God) was forgotten out of the mouth of all living, and out of their knowledge, and they acknowledged him not. And there was found no people on the earth that knew aught, save images of wood and stone, which they had been trained up from their childhood to worship and serve, and to swear by their names. And the wise men that were among them, as the priests and such like, thought there was no God save the stars and spheres, for whose sake and in whose likeness they had made these images; but as for the Rock everlasting, there was no man that acknowledged him or knew him save a few persons in the world, as Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Shem, and Heber. And in this way did the world walk and converse till that pillar of the world, Abraham our father, was born."  Maim. in Mishn. and Ainsworth in loco.
 
     From the time of the fall (approx. 4100 B.C.) to the time of the flood (approx. 2353 B.C.) the area we recognize today called Mesopotamia, was occupied and influenced by at least the Sumerian, Babylonian and Egyptian cultures. These nations had fallen into gross paganism that included sexual fertility rituals, the offering up human sacrifices, including babies, homosexual activities and more. Just a few of the deities they offered their sacrifices to included (but not limited to) Ashteroth and Anath (two fertility goddesses), Baal, Marduk (a Babylonian god). As the above Treatise indicates; 
"And there was found no people on the earth
that knew aught, save images of wood and stone, 
which they had been trained up from their childhood 
to worship and serve, and to swear by their names."  
     As it was in the time of Noah, will we see these gross activities of pagan worship again? I fear that we will, and the book of Revelation confirms it.
"But as the days of Noah were, so also will the coming of the Son of Man be."
(see: Matt.24:36-39)
