- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                            by: Dan Conley

- Problems In Studying "The Beginning" -

     Before you jump into a wonderful and fascinating study of how our world and the universe where formed, you need to be made aware of a few problem areas. By recognizing these problems you can avoid making serious errors in your study both from a Biblical as well as a scientific viewpoint. Please consider them carefully!

     1. Neither the scientific or the creation approach to the "beginning" can be proven through a scientific method. This is because the scientific method has to have areas that can be tested in order to confirm or refute a theory or hypothesis. Because there is no known way of going back in time to perform the experiments needed, neither creation or evolution can be proven as "fact" by any scientific experimentation. Therefore, any investigation in this area is at best is a fascinating inquiry of the available possibilities.

    2. Both the scientific and creation approaches must be studied separately without any attempt to force one view upon the other. Only after a "proper" study of each has been made should a reasonable comparison be made between the Biblical and scientific models.

    3. In studying the scriptural presentation of creation care must be taken to use a correct "exegesis" of the passages. Fragmented studies that ignore the content of the text and then attempt to impose those concepts into the Genesis account only lead to incorrect conclusions concerning the Biblical model of creation. A properly exegeted passage should never be changed simply because it conflicts with an area of science or social standards.
If errors were made in the exegesis of a passage, due to improper study methods, they should be re-examined and corrected keeping the overall context as well as Gods' character in mind.

    4. Two errors of  a personal nature that generally appear.
        a.) There is a tendency for people to believe only what they can understand or 
           accept from their own "frame of reference". Too often we limit the abilities of God 
           by our own inability to get out of our "frame of reference".  
         b.) Our concept of God is too small and, generally, not 100% in line with Scripture.
           How well a person understands and accepts a proper Scriptural description of 
           God, will be the determining factor in how that person analyzes the world around
           them and responds to it.




