- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                            by: Dan Conley

- Biblical References Related to Worship -

Genesis 4:1-7; "Now Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bore Cain, and said, 'I have  
                           acquired a man from the Lord.' Then she bore again, this time his brother Able. Now 
                           Able was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground. And in the process of 
                           time it came to pass that Cain brought an offering of the fruit of the ground to the 
                           Lord. Able also brought of the firstborn of his flock and of the fat. And the Lord 
                           respected Able and his offering, but He did not respect Cain and his offering. And 
                           Cain was very angry, and his countenance fell. So the Lord said to Cain, 'Why are you 
                           angry? And why has your countenance fallen? If you do well, will you not be 
                           accepted? And if you do not do well, sin lies at the door. And its desire is for you, but 
                           you should rule over it."

     This first recorded act of worship toward the Lord has at least three major areas that we should consider in relation to our own attempts at worship.
1) God is the one who has established what He will accept as proper worship. In this case the "...firstborn of his flock and of the fat." (symbolic and prophetic reference to Christ.)
2) Like Cain and Able, we have the responsibility of  worshipping God in the way He has designed, not in a way we think might be  acceptable.
3) The actions of Cain show us the effects of the original sin. (i.e. the struggle now within man to choose between "good and evil", or "right and wrong") Cain must have known what was acceptable to the Lord, yet he chose to present the Lord something that he thought was just as good. From v.6&7 it would seem that Cain was looking for personal satisfaction from his offering rather than true offering for the Lord.
     We should also be careful, and ask ourselves what our true motive is for coming before the Lord God to worship. 

Genesis 5: 21-24; "Enoch lived sixty-five years, and begot Methuselah. After he begot Methuselah, 
                               Enoch walked with God three hundred years, and had sons and daughters. So all 
                               the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years. And Enoch walked with 
                               God; and he was not, for God took him."
     
     The life of Enoch is often overlooked as a type of worship. Yet, it is probably one of the most profound examples of  a life dedicated to worshipping God that can be found in scripture. Adam Clarkes' Commentary, written in 1884, reminds us that Enoch managed to "walk with God" while managing the day to day responsibilities to his family (wife, sons and daughters), supplying food and shelter, dealing with others in his community, etc.. In other words, it is an illegitimate claim for us not to worship God correctly (or not at all), based on our circumstances, no matter what they might be. 
     One description of the life of Enoch goes like this: 
"Each morning Enoch would get up, leave his house and go find God. They would spend the entire day together walking and doing whatever needed to be done. At the end of each day, Enoch would thank God for a wonderful day and being with him, then return to his home. One evening, after three hundred years of walking with God each day, they were about to part when God said to Enoch, 'Enoch, we're closer to My house then yours, why don't you come home with Me tonight?' Enoch did, and has been there ever since." 
     

     
-2-

Genesis 6:6-9; "And the Lord was sorry that He had made man on the earth, and He grieved in His 
                          heart. So the Lord said, 'I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the 
                          earth, both man and beast, creeping thing and birds of the air, for I am sorry that I 
                          have made them.' But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. This is the genealogy 
                          of Noah. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations. Noah walked with 
                          God."

     This may seem to be a strange place to find worship, but it brings out the point that worship is "taught and not caught". Clarke's Commentary notes that the phrase "...walked with God" describes a person who has; "...set himself to walk, he was fixedly purposed and determined to live to God." It also describes a person whose conscience decision to follow God is so strong in its conviction that once made, there is no thought of changing course.  
     This may be conjecture on my part, but I believe that Noah learned about his great grand-fathers' life of "walking with God", and made the decision to follow in his footsteps. It is well know fact that the best way to teach is through example. Christ taught by example and we are to be examples to those around us so they can see Christ in us. The same is true of worship. When we 'catch' worship it is usually shallow and short lived. When we are 'taught' to worship correctly, it stays with you forever. 
     The depth of Noahs commitment to walk with God is seen in his obedience to the task God gave to him. For one-hundred years, Noah worshipped God ,through his obedience, by building a giant ark that would save him and his family from a world wide flood.

     In order to better understand the attitude and depth of worship found in Enoch and Noah, we need to examine Hebrews 11:1-7. 
Hebrews 11:1-7; "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. 
                             For by it the elders obtained a good testimony. By faith we understand that the 
                             worlds were framed by the word of God, so that the things which are seen were not 
                             made of things which are visible. By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent 
                             sacrifice than Cain, through which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God 
                             testifying of his gifts; and through it he being dead still speaks. By faith Enoch was 
                             taken away so that he did not see death, 'and was not found, because God had taken 
                             him'; for before he was taken he had this testimony, that he pleased God. But without 
                             faith it is impossible to please Him, for he who comes to God must believe that He 
                             is, and that He is a rewarder of those who diligently seek Him. By faith Noah, being 
                             warned of things not yet seen, moved with godly fear, prepared an ark for the saving 
                             of his household, by which he condemned the world and became heir of the 
                             righteousness which is according to faith."

(Mickey, take a look at the copy from Clarkes Commentary I have attached to this page. It explains a depth of worship and the 'foundation' of faith in a way we don't use today.)
