
- The Wisdom Chart -

     I have always had an interest in the book of Proverbs. Its' practical and sometimes amusing way of presenting life is refreshing in our confused and complex world. The fact that it is called by many, "The Book of Wisdom" is not by accident. It is filled with wise sayings concerning an endless number of situations, attitudes and actions. It raises questions for us to examine in every area of our lives, including; What is wisdom?
     The wisdom chart came about primarily because of this one question. (What is wisdom?) My struggle, was that there seemed to be no distinction between what the world used as a definition for wisdom, and what Christians used as a definition for wisdom. This could not be right. There had to be a difference, but what it was and where a person could find an appropriate answer was not easily solved. "The game was afoot!"
     In 1975 , while my wife and I were working at Hume Lake Christian Camps, in the mountains of California, we became friends with one of the founders of the camp, Hermon Pettit. He was 82 years old when we first met him. He had a pipe line to God through prayer like I had never seen before. At one of the prayer meetings that he held at his cabin he asked each of us; "If you could ask God for just one thing, what would it be?". After each response, we would prayer for that request. When it was my turn, I told Hermon that I would really like to understand "spiritual wisdom". I referred to James Chapter 1:5. Hermon then did something that he had not done with the others in the group. He turned to them and asked, "Do you believe that God will answer Dans' request?" They all said yes and we prayed. Little did I know that that prayer would be answered almost ten years later.
     Between 1975 and 1986 God helped me to find the answer to my question and fulfill my prayer request. "Wisdom has built her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars"
(Proverbs 9:1) This verse was the key to finding a scriptural description of wisdom, but I hadn't found the "lock" that fit the key! I asked pastors and teachers what the "seven pillars of wisdom" might be, but none of the answers seemed correct. I kept looking.
     Finally, like a bright light being turned on, I found it in Chapter 8:7-14 of Proverbs. I had read this chapter many times and had never seen it before; wisdom describing itself.
With just a little adjusting it fell easily into seven parts: Truth, Righteousness, Instruction & Knowledge, Prudence, Fear of The Lord, Counsel, Understanding.
     I numbered them 1-7 and then re-read Proverbs numbering each of the seven words as I came across them throughout the book. They were everywhere! Then, with the use of a "computer aided drafting program" (CAD) I  put what I had found in this chart format. During this process I learned the following:
    First, Gods wisdom is not the same as mans wisdom. Mankind generally uses only one-seventh of Gods wisdom. We define wisdom more in terms of  proper use of time and materials. This is close to the definition of "prudence".
    Second, when you look at how each part of wisdom is tied to the other remaining parts, it becomes clear that it cannot be taken apart. They all make up the whole of wisdom. To use one without the others destroys the intent of His wisdom.
    Third, the fact that the parts of true wisdom are so tightly related should help us in our understanding of the character of God Himself. We often fragment His character by focusing on only a few (or one) of His attributes to the exclusion of the others. (i.e. love, mercy, wrath, etc.) By doing this we often come up with an incomplete and distorted understanding of who and what God is.
    




     Finally, this chart only represents a "pinpoint" of Gods infinite wisdom. The chart only shows the positive side of wisdom. The negative, or foolish side of wisdom is a whole other story. Also, what is in this chart is finite. His wisdom is infinite.

            "My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments
           with thee; so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine 
           heart to understanding; yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up
           thy voice for understanding; if thou seekest her as silver, and searchest
            for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord,
           and find the knowledge of God. For the Lord giveth wisdom: out of his 
           mouth cometh knowledge and understanding. He layeth up sound wisdom
           for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. He keepeth
           the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints. Then shalt
           thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every good
           path."    Prov. 2:1-9   


                                                                                 Sincerely in Christ,
                                                                                     Dan Conley

                                                                        
- Wisdom -
(To Find Life and Favor With the Lord)
- The seven parts of wisdom -

1. Truth : Prov. 8:7 - For my mouth shall speak truth, and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
                 Prov. 23:23 -Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.
     If you are to buy Truth, you must pay for it by giving up _____________.
     Truth combined with mercy: Devises good (Prov. 14:22); Iniquity is purged (Prov. 16:6); Preserves 
     the King (Prov. 20:28)

2. Righteousness: Prov. 8:8 -All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing 
    crooked or perverse in them.
    Def.- Righteousness is "Doing what is right according to God's standard" not man's. (or) 2. A right 
             standing before God.
     Righteousness comes from God  and we can receive it only by listening and obeying His instruction. 
     (See Prov. 2:1-9)  

3. Instruction and Knowledge: Prov. 8:10 - Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge 
    rather than choice gold.
    Def.- Knowledge- Obtains and retains accurate information (includes intellectual, experiential and 
            spiritual)
            Instruction - Imparts knowledge (all types) to others in an understandable and usable manner.
     Knowledge and instruction stand as one part of wisdom simply because you can not have one without 
     the other. It is not possible to have knowledge without having been "instructed" at some time by a 
     "knowledgeable" person. Also, to attempt to "instruct" without proper knowledge is foolishness.

4. Prudence: Prov. 8:12 - I, wisdom, dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions.
    Def. - Analyzes situations and circumstances for the best use of time, money, etc.. Doesn't "rush" in; 
    finds out knowledge of "witty inventions". 
    Prudence is the one part of God's wisdom that is most widely used by mankind. Unfortunately, 
    most Christians are unaware that the kind of wisdom we use on a daily bases has little or no 
    relationship to God's wisdom described in Proverbs. Therefore, we too need to practice all seven 
    parts of God's wisdom as best we can with His help.

5. Fear of The Lord: Prov. 8:13 - The fear of the Lord is to hate evil; pride, and arrogance, and the 
    evil way, and the perverse mouth, do I hate.
    Def. - Holding God and Christ in a "reverent and respectable position. Also, a true understanding 
    and "fear" of His power and ability to judge those who disobey Him.

6. Counsel: Prov. 8:14a - Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom.
    Def. - To be advised by, and from, Godly and knowledgeable sources. (Heb. 6:11-12 "And we desire 
    that every one of you do show the same diligence* (*see v. 1-10 for context) to the full assurance of 
    hope unto the end; (12) That you be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and 
    patience inherit the promises.

7. Understanding: Prov. 8:14b - ... I am understanding; I have strength. Prov. 9:10 - "The fear of 
    the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.     


- Non-Wisdom -
(wrongs his own soul, loves death and wickedness)

1. Lies: (opposite of: Truth) Sells, or gives up the truth. Also is deceitful and false.

2. Unrighteousness: (opposite of: Righteousness) Froward / Perverse - "Evil"; not having a desire to follow God's standard of "right". Goal of pursuing evil, wickedness and material wealth.

3. Willingly Stupid, Brutish : (opposite of: Instruction & Knowledge) Lacks knowledge, near destruction, refuses reproof and good instruction. (Prov. 12:1)

4. Impulsive: (opposite of: Prudence) Does not consider the results of his actions. Waists material, time, integrity, honesty etc..

5. No Regard for God / Christ. (opposite of: Fear of the Lord) Has no thought of God or Christ. Has a love for evil, pride, hate, arrogance, lies etc..

6. Worldly Counsel: (opposite of: Good or Wise Counsel) Void of Godly input or values, worldly in nature, self centered, brings in contention, fighting, anger.  Wants to "know thyself". ( Proverbs 18:2; 28:26; 29:11) 

7. Simple or Foolish: (opposite of: Understanding) Self seeking, wants to 'know his own heart'. Lacks and rejects the knowledge of God. Does not fear God or have a concern for the results of his actions. Much the same as 'Worldly Counsel' . 





- Wisdom vs. Wisdom -
(which is which and how can we know?)

James 3:13-18 - "Who among you is wise and understanding? Let him show by his good behavior 
                           his deeds in the [1] gentleness of wisdom. 
                           But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your heart, do not be 
                           arrogant and so lie against the truth.
                           [2[This wisdom is not that which comes  down from above, but is [a]earthly,  
                           [b]natural, [c]demonic. 
                           For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there is disorder and every evil thing.
                           But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, reasonable, full of 
                           mercy and good fruits, unwavering, without hypocrisy.
                           And the seed whose fruit is righteousness is sown in peace by those who make 
                           peace.

This passage shows that there are more then one kind of wisdom. The wisdom of man vs. the wisdom from above.

James 1:5-7; If we lack wisdom we should ask God! (turn to passage)

I Corinthians 2: 1-8 ; Paul did not come with the wisdom of men, in order that the people's faith            
                                    would rest on the wisdom of God.

Isaiah 55: 8-9;  "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, declares            
                           the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than 
                           your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts."

