- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                          by: Dan Conley

"The Church Building Project"
- or -
(Oops! What Went Wrong?)

     From the time I was just a young boy I can remember being involved in church building projects. As a matter of fact, from the age of about ten (in the late 1950's) up to this present time, I have been involved in five church building programs. My Dad was always willing to help out with these projects in whatever construction capacity he was needed. I usually got to come along. It was at these church building projects that I got some of  my first experiences in construction. I got a chance to help build walls, sheetrock, tape and texture, sand, and even paint. All within the confines of one of the many closets of the new building. It was fun. As I got better at it they let me do things outside the closet too! I didn't know it then, but these learning experiences would become foundational building blocks of my life in years to come.
     The one thing I enjoyed most about these times was the fellowship of the men and women who came to work on these projects. They helped each other. They joked with each other. There was a beautiful bond of love that could be felt. It was Gods' Holy Spirit at work in His people. That was more than thirty-five ago and  I can still remember the beautiful warmth of those times. It was my first church building project experience. It was great! 
     But something happened, and a few years later the church split. Right down the middle! Why? I didn't know. The same people who were once laughing, working and loving; were now arguing and angry with each other. How could this  happen? It was sad and upsetting. My parents, (mostly my mom), went with those who left the church. They started another church in a different part of town. The people who stayed at the original church eventually had to sell the building because there weren't enough people to pay the monthly mortgage payments. They bought a smaller church  that was almost the same size as the one they had occupied before. They were back where they had started some five years earlier.
     The church that was started by those who left, bought some property that had a house on it and a good size garage. They remodeled the garage to serve as a church and began holding services. It seemed to do well for a time but within about ten years it died from an internal spiritual disease called legalism. 
     My mom (again) had a falling out with some one in the church and so we moved to another church. This one was a good size (probably about five to seven hundred) and  in need of Sunday School space. It wasn't long before they were in the middle of a building program in order to add a new educational wing to the church. By this time I was in about eighth or ninth grade and, yes, I helped out with the building of the new addition. I even have a good size scar on my right elbow to prove it. It took several stitches.
     Unfortunately, this project was not without problems. As best as I can recall, the pastor was asked to resign either just before or after the building was completed. The people were left struggling to pay off the loan and find a new pastor at the same time. Why he was asked to leave I don't know. I was still young and not allowed to have this information.


     
     Through the rest of high school and college the churches I attended were not involved  in building programs. It wasn't until after my wife and I were married in 1974 that there was another church building project 'craze' in the East Bay of San Francisco. By this time I was skeptical of building projects because of what I had already experienced. Yet (you guessed it), we found ourselves at a small church that wanted to expand and remodel. But this church had a problem that is not uncommon among congregations. First, an over zealous pastor with a limited knowledge of building code procedures and second; a 'class A-1 stress personality excavation contractor' who didn't care much for building inspectors. Not to mention that he thought he knew all the building codes and had the ability to bulldoze his way through city officials because he knew the right people. This combination is about as safe as bundle of dynamite with a lit fuse!
     Before continuing with what happened at this church, I need to update you as to what I had been doing. If for no other reason than to assure you that I was no longer a novice, and that I had a pretty good idea of what I was looking at in regard to construction procedures and planning. 
     I  graduated from college in 1972 with a B.A. in Speech Communications. In 1973-1974 I attended Moody Bible Institute (Advanced Studies Program. One year course of all Bible classes). My wife and I were married in 1974. We both worked at Hume Lake Christian Camps in 1975. (where we saw more building project problems). 1976-1978 I was the Assistant Pastor of the Oakland Evangelical Free Church.(Here was what was left of a congregation that had had a building project some years earlier and suffered a split like many other churches.) From here I went into construction with my brother- in- law for about 2-1/2 years. Finally, at the time we were attending the previously mentioned church,    I had been running my own business doing architectural drafting. I had also gone back to college where I graduated with an A.A. in Architectural Technology and a few other certificates related to construction and architecture. This was about1984 and I was 34 years old.
     There were two construction activities that happened at this church that were small in nature but had far reaching effects. First, the church needed more area for parking. This would have been simple except that the only available place for more parking was on the side of a steep hill that the church owned. The excavation contractor  offered to dig out and move the hillside. So he did!. Unfortunately, the building code states that not over 1500 cu. yards. of dirt can be moved without a permit. He had moved no less than 3 to 4 thousand cu yards of dirt without getting a permit, not to mention that in "earthquake country" you simply don't do such things. The building officials were not pleased!
     Next, I was asked to design a 'portable stage' for the church. I did, and they got the proper permit for putting it together. About half way through the construction, some one decided that they wanted it to be a 'permanent stage'. The people building it went ahead with this idea, but never informed the building dept. of the changes. When the building inspector was called out to check the work he could not approve it because now it was in violation of building codes. Oops! hadn't thought of that!
      Because of these two seemingly insignificant errors, the testimony of this church became worthless as far as city officials were concerned. The reason that I know this to be true is that at the time all this happened, I had been working with the head engineer of the 

city on housing designs that I was preparing. They were not pleased with how this church conducted its business.
      Even before we had started attending this church I been wondering how so many churches could have so much trouble over a building project. By now I had also observed a number of other churches in the East Bay Area (San Francisco) that had gone through similar problems. It didn't add up! If  the people of a church were truly following Gods' will and honestly knew that God wanted them to build; then why was there so much fighting, anger and division seen in these projects? How is it possible for people who  love God and Christ to wind up in such a "pickle"? What was wrong?
     There are many things that can be easily identified as possible problems in any of the church building projects that we've looked at so far. Poor judgment, poor leadership, lack of proper construction technique, not working well with building officials, money, lack of spiritual guidance and much more. Most of these (if not all) have been used by church members to express their dissatisfaction over what was going on with the building program in which they were involved. 
     However, the more I thought about the many complaints that could be leveled against church building projects, I realized that the complaints were only a description of symptoms of a deeper problem. The two areas that eventually stood out from all the rest as the deeper root problems seemed to be: 1) Faith in Gods' ability to get the project done. and 2) Bank loans. These were tied together some how, but at the time I didn't have an answer. There is a great deal in scripture about faith, but there is very little about loans.  There was still something I was either missing or not understanding. But the next church building project would open my eyes to many things. It was the worst!
    If you took all of churches we've discussed so far, with all their problems, anger, finger pointing and mismanagement; then lumped them all together, you wouldn't even come close to what happened in this next church. Because it isn't proper to expose all the problems of this church to others, I am only going to give a brief description of what happened. Besides, we don't have the time, nor do I have the desire to go through it all.
    Before this church started their building program, they had a chapel that would seat about seven hundred people. They had a large piece of property in what might be considered a middle class  part of the East Bay of San Francisco. They had also purchased an old elementary school that was  north of the main property on the next corner across the street. They were seeing wonderful increases in attendance  that was exciting. But these increases were also causing serious space problems both in the morning and evening services as well as Sunday School. There were roughly 1500 people (more at Christmas and Easter) that attended this church. They were holding two services each Sunday (at one time it went up to three services). They obviously needed to build a new sanctuary (or start a branch churh in another location.) that also had  more space for offices and Sunday School. They had close to three times the number of people attending the church than they had room for.
     The usual research was done along with other formalities of appointing a building committee, congregational discussions and voting. It was finally agreed  to build the needed 



sanctuary and Sunday School space at a total cost of 5.5 million dollars, and to pay for it as God supplied the finances. It was a big project, but it sounded like it was off to good start. Unfortunately, starting good and finishing good are two different matters.
     Everything was going along fine until we reached a point that was about one-third to half way through the project. Then something happened that changed everything. I can still see the pastor's face as he gave the announcement from the pulpit. When he gave the announcement it felt like the presence of the Holy Spirit had just been drained right out of the room. He said that we didn't have enough money to continue the project at that time. He also said that the contractor had informed the church that if he had to pull out his equipment, it would cost the church more money to bring it all back in at a later date. Based on this information the church board had made the decision to take out a loan to complete the project. Many people were saddened by this, including myself, but there was nothing we could do about it.
     About a year and a half later the new sanctuary and other aspects of the project were near completion. The church had also started a program that was designed to get people closer to God. (Similar to "Experiencing God" or "90 Days With God In Your Home") We got close to Him all right, but some one should have warned them that when God (i.e. Christ) comes into your home, the first room He cleans is the one that's the dirtiest and has the biggest lock on it. Some one else had forgotten  that  I Peter 4:17 says: 

"For it is time for judgement to begin with the household of God;
                     and if it begins with us first, what will be the outcome for those
                     who do not obey the gospel of God?"

     Early fall 1987, Sunday evening service, the senior pastor stood before the congregation and confessed to the people that he had committed adultery five years earlier. The woman he had been involved with was one of the church secretaries. All of this had been kept a secret from the board and the congregation by an agreement signed by all five of the pastors of the church. At another time in a meeting of high school young people, the pastor's son confessed that he had been a practicing homosexual for the past three years. It was also found that the conduct of one of the pastors who was involved with a special music group had made questionable advances toward some of the women in the group. All of this and more, was added to the fact that there were some  two million dollars of cost over runs from the building project which put the church approximately 7.5 million dollars in debt. This does not include interest which could make the total amount exceed 15 million dollars over the life of the loan (depending on interest rates.)
     The senior pastor resigned. Eventually, three other pastors would resign under a dark cloud. The elementary school north of the church was sold in order to pay off some of the dept. The church split like an over ripe melon!
     Because of the stress at this time there was one board member, Mr. V., who suffered a physical and emotional breakdown and was hospitalized. Another board member, Mr. O. died! What went wrong?
                                                   Ecclesiastes 8, 5-6:
    "Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing; and a wise man's heart diserneth both time and judgement. Because to every purpose there is time and judgement,
therefore the misery of man is great upon him."

     I have had several years now to reflect on what happened to this church along with the others I have mentioned. I am now convinced that the root problem in all of these cases is that they forgot Who is the True Builder of the church. They also forgot that Satan likes to destroy churches in any way he can. He's subtle ...and he's good at it!

                          "Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain
                           that build it; except the Lord keep the city, the   
                           watchman waketh but in vain."
                                                                             Psalms 127:1

     In our present fast pace world it is easy to think we are doing the right thing in regard to God's will and yet forget that His work requires His method to reach His appointed goal.
Even in how new people come into the church, we think we have to make programs that are pleasing to the world in order for them to come. In our building programs we even fall into the trap of thinking that we need to finish the work quickly so as not to lose those who might not want to come to a church that is under construction. We forget that God builds this too. In His time.

                                "And day by day continuing with one mind in the
                                temple, and breaking bread from house to house,
                                they were taking their meals together with gladness
                                and sincerity of heart, praising God, and having 
                                favor with all the people.And the Lord was adding
                                to their number day by day those who were 
                                being saved."
                                                                                Acts 2:46-47  

     Since God is the builder of the church it is important to do the work by His method. This isn't easy! Especially when it comes to money and time. But before I get to far into this subject I need to mention one important item. That is making promises to God. In Ecclesiastes 5:4-6 we find what should be a frightening passage for us all.

                                 "When you make a vow to God, do not be late in
                                 paying it, for He takes no delight in fools. Pay what
                                 you vow! It is better that you should not vow than 
                                 that you should vow and not pay. Do not let your
                                 speech cause you to sin and do not say in the 
                                 presence of the messenger of God that it was a
                                 mistake. Why should God be angry on account of
                                 your voice and destroy the work of your hands?"

     
     Just about every church I know has made a promise to God as to how it is to be used. This promise is usually made when a church is first established, and a verse of scripture is carved into a plaque and mounted near the entrance of the building.
     The church I am presently attending has done just that. Just outside the east entrance to the church there is plaque that says: " Dedicated to the glory of God. '...Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith.' " If you have one on your church you should find it and read it. That, my friends, is a promise to God! Be careful to keep it!
     Well, what does all this have to do with building programs? If you look back at the last church I described, I showed that they had agreed to build the buildings they needed and pay for it as God supplied the finances. Then later, when they got in a bind, they changed their mind and took out a loan. It was at the point that they decided to change their original agreement with the people and with God that they broke their promise to the people and God. God then did exactly what is written in Ecclesiastes 5:4-6. The church lost property and the "...work of their hands was destroyed." 
     This is the one principle that stands as a constant in every church that I have been involved with, or have observed with a building program. That they do not take their own promises to God seriously. Their promise to God is bolted to the building, in beautiful type on the letterhead, even embossed on the bulletin, and they still ignore it! That's a big mistake!

                                "But a certain man named Ananias, with his
                                wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property, and
                                kept back some of the price for himself, with
                                his wife's full knowledge, and bringing a portion
                                of it, he laid it at the apostles' feet. But Peter
                                said, 'Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart
                                to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back
                                some of the price of the land? 'While it remained
                                unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it
                                was sold, was it not under your control? Why is 
                                it that you have conceived this deed in your 
                                heart? You have not lied to men, but to God.'
                                And as he heard these words, Ananias fell down 
                                and breathed his last; and great fear came upon
                                all who heard it. And the young men arose and 
                                covered him up, and after carrying him out,
                                they buried him."
                                                                                   Acts 5:1-6

     As I mentioned earlier, Satan would love nothing more than to destroy a church and the people in it. Especially the fellowship and love that binds them together. I believe that he manages to do this by setting up a subtle, yet dangerous trap. One that requires the building of something new and demands our utmost attention. While  wanting to meet this need, we look around for the best way to solve the problem. Unfortunately, at this point we tend to lean more toward the world's solution than the scriptures. Also, if our faith in Gods' 
ability to meet the need is tainted by the influences of the world around us, bingo! Satan now has his foothold. If we believe that it is all right for the church to take out a loan from a secular institution, then Satan really has us 'set up' to break our promises to God. Look at the following verses.

                               "Watch yourself that you make no covenant
                               with the inhabitants of the land into which you 
                               are going, lest it become a snare in your midst."
                                                                        Ex.34:12

                                "For the Lord your God shall bless you as He 
                                has promised you, and you lend to many nations,
                                but you will not borrow; and you will rule over
                                many nations, but they will not rule over you."
                                                                         Deut. 15:6
                            (Also see Deut. 28: 12. It says almost the same thing.)

     The children of Isreal were commanded not to borrow from other nations or peoples. You might be saying; "True, but does the New Testament have anything on this subject?" Yep!

                                 "Do not be bound together with unbelievers;
                                 for what partnership have righteousness and
                                 lawlessness, or what fellowship has light with
                                 darkness? Or what harmony has Christ with Belial,
                                 or what has a believer with an unbeliever? "
                                                                      II Cor. 6:14-15
                     (I would incourage you to read the rest of this chapter as well.)

                                  "You adulteresses, do you not know that
                                  friendship with the world is hostility toward
                                  God? Therefore, whoever wishes to be a friend 
                                  of the world makes himself an enemy of God."
                                                                      James 4:4 

     Toward the beginning of this paper I mentioned two things that stood out as possible root problems in church building programs. They were, 1) Faith in Gods' ability to get the project done. and 2) Bank loans. The above verses tell the Israelites not to "borrow" from others as a nation. We are told in the N.T. not to be "bound together with unbelievers"
We usually use this verse in context of marriage, however it applies in our work as a corporate church as well. When we shift from having faith in Gods' ability to supply our needs and allow a secular organization to takes it's place, three things have happened. First, 



we have broken our promise with God in our dedication "bolted" to the wall of the church. Next, we have entangled ourselves with the world and its methods. This is unacceptable according to the above verses. Finally, we have (without really meaning to) silently demonstrated that God is not able to supply our needs unless He gets help from worldly sources. 
    In conclusion, I need to tell you that at the same time the last church was falling into a pile of dust, there was another church that was having the a 5.5 million dollar building project just like us. The difference was that they stood firm on their belief that God could and would supply all that was needed to complete the program. They didn't get a loan. Had few problems. If I remember right, they finished just a short time after we did. The building was paid for by the hand of the Almighty God. They did it right.
    Do you believe that God can provide all that we need without the help out an outside loan? I do! I also believe it is a challenge we need in order to build our faith in Gods ability to meet the needs of our church.

                         "IS THERE ANYTHING TOO HARD FOR THE LORD?"
                                                          Gen. 18:14

                    "...With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible."
                                                          Mat. 19: 26

                    "But without faith it is impossible to please him; for he that cometh to
                    God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that 
                    diligently seek him."
                                                            Heb.11:6    


                                      "Is there anything too hard for the Lord?"

                                                   What's your answer?
                                                                  
                                     
                                                   Sincerely, In Christ 
                                                    Daniel C. Conley
                                 

      
          
               

