- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley

- Those Who Destroy The Earth -
and
(The   Soul's Enemies )

     From the beginning of this study there has been a "bad guy", a home wreckers, an assassin, a destroyer of 'that which is good', a big fat liar! We call him, Satan, the devil, the deceiver, serpent, the dragon and on polite days, the Adversary or the Accuser of our brothers and a few more. In short (to late!) the accuser of God's people and the enemy of God Himself.
     This demonic 'thing' works against everything that is good before God. From the beginning of creation he has worked hard to destroy the works of God. When God told Adam and Eve that they could not eat of the tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, because if they did they would die, the serpent told Eve that what God said was a lie. She would not die, but instead she would have the knowledge of God. (see Gen. chapt.3) She believed the serpent, ate of the fruit, gave some to her husband and sin entered creation and through sin death entered creation as well.
     This is not the only time Satan tried to deceive someone into believing that they wouldn't die if they followed his advise. Would you believe he even tried it on Jesus? The circumstances were different, but the plot was just the same. (You can find the full account in either Matt.4: 1-11; or Luke 4: 1-13.)
-Luke 4: 9-12-
"Then he (Satan) brought Him to Jerusalem, set Him on the pinnacle of the temple,
and said to Him, "If You are the Son of God, throw Yourself down from here.
For it is written: He shall give His angels charge over you, to keep you,'
"and, 'In their hands they shall bear you up, Lest you dash your foot against a stone.'"
And Jesus answered and said, "You shall not tempt the Lord Your God.'"
    
     Satan is not as direct here as he was with Eve, but the concept is the same. Satan was telling Jesus that He would not die if He were to jump off from that pinnacle because angels would save Him. Maybe they would, but why believe "the liar"?
     The lies and deceptions of Satan and his associates (the beasts, dragons, the whore, etc.) are the very entities that God is going to destroy during end times of the Apocalypse. Unfortunately, Satan will have deceived many people to follow him and they too will be destroyed because of their following the Deceiver and blaspheming the very Spirit of the Holy God Who sits on the Throne of Heaven.


References concerning, 'The Soul's Enemies'; 1) Eph. 6: 10-18, esp. v.10-12, Armor, principalities and powers in high places. 2) I Peter 5: 6-9 'goes about as a roaring lion.'  3) Luke 22:31-34, Satan wants to 'sift Peter. 4) Gen. 1:1-24 Satan's attack on Eve, Adam and the character of God. 5) Matt. 4:1-11 & 
Luke 4:9-12; Satan's attack of Jesus Christ himself. 6) Luke 22:50-53, Satan's use of the chief priests and captains of the temple to arrest Jesus and have him crucified.

