- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                            by: Dan Conley
   (first written February,  1995)                                                                              (revised, Mar. 2006)                 
The Elect / Election / Foreknowledge

Introduction

     From the time I first heard a classroom presentation of the doctrine of election , I have believed that there were at least two major problems that it failed to overcome in order to be considered an accurate scriptural position. Since that time, in early 1970, I have found that there are significant problems in the methods used in the developing of the Calvinistic viewpoint. Primarily, the approach used makes
assumptions concerning the verses used in particular passages of Scripture, without regard for the surrounding verses which set the context of what is being presented. Also, there seems to be little, or no, attempt to keep the Character of God (as a whole), as a "final check" for the conclusions that are made.
     In this study, it is my intent to examine a number of the passages that are linked to the Biblical concept of 'election' along with other supporting passages, in order to 'untangle this theological hairball' that was developed by John Calvin some 500 years ago.(1509-1564) I am not, however, going to examine the life of  John Calvin in any way. I believe that it is best to refer those who read this study to the work of  Mr. Dave Hunt; entitled; What Love Is This? (Calvinisms Misrepresentation of God) copyright 2002 by Dave Hunt; Loyal Publishing, Inc., P.O. Box 1892, Sisters, Or, 97759.

Definition of Terms

    The definitions below are provided in order to establish a common platform from which to examine the theological doctrine of election and other areas that may be helpful for a better understanding of  this subject. The definitions given are not complete. For a full and
complete presentation refer to Vine's Complete  Expository Dictionary (see Bibliography).

1.  Elect:  lit. signifies "picked out, chosen" and is used of:
          a) Christ, the chosen of God.
          b) Angels, 1 Tim. 5:21, as "chosen" to be of especially high rank in administrative  
              association with God, or as His messengers to humans, ...etc.
          c) The Jewish Nation as God's chosen people.
          d) O.T. Prophets 
          e) Apostles
          f)  Believers:, whom He did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to   
              the image of His Son. (Rom. 8:29)

2. Election: denotes "a picking out, selection", then, "that which is chosen"...etc.

3. Foreknow: To know before as in "divine knowledge" concerning Christ ...etc.

4. Foreknowledge: (akin to foreknow), is one aspect of God's omniscience....etc.

5. Predestinate: (grk.- proorizo) same word used for  determine, means "to mark out  
    beforehand"." proorizo, has special reference to that to which the subjects of His  
    foreknowledge are 'predestined'." (Vine's)
            (See Vine's Complete Expository Dictionary for further information.)


- The  Elect -

     There are numerous places within Scripture that refer to those who have been "elected" by God. This term literally means "picked out, or chosen".Kenneth Wuest in his Expanded Translation of the New Testament uses the phrase "chosen out ones" in many places. 
     In Matthew 12:17-21, the prophecy of  Esaias (i.e. Isaiah) is quoted "...Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased:..." referring directly to Christ. Another passage that depicts Christ as being chosen by the "...determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,...", is found in Acts 2:22-24.The Old Testament book of Isaiah written sometime between c.740-680 B.C., describes the sufferings of Christ in chapter 53.Although the chapter does not specifically mention "Christ", there is no doubt that it is referring to him. The fact that this was written long before Christ appeared in human form, and that verses 10-12  tell of "the Lord" being pleased to "bruise him" in order to make his"...soul an offering for sin..." can only be interpreted as Christ being chosen to be the sacrifice for our sins even at the time of Isaiah.
    Angels are mentioned as being "elect" in 1 Timothy 5:21.
          
           " I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
            elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring                                   
            one before another, doing nothing by partiality."

     Unfortunately, there is no indication as to who, or what, these angels are. It has been assumed by several authors that they are "...of especially high rank in administrative association with God, or as His messenger to human beings,..." (i.e. such as Michael the Archangel or Gabriel) As to angels being messenger to humans, this is easily found in scripture. However, that they were "elected" for this purpose (in the same way we speak of human election), is difficult to support. Another group of  fallen angels can be identified as being "set apart" for destruction, because they sinned, in 2 Peter 2:4. They are described as "...angels that sinned...", and are being held in, "...chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment;...". (This could be looked at as angels waiting for their "sentence" to be carried out.) 
      God's Chosen People. The Jewish nation chosen in time past through Abraham and Sarah. There is no shortage of information on this act of  God to choose a people for His own. Genesis 12:1 through to the end of Genesis, on into Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and the rest of the Old Testament books proclaim the descendants of Abraham and Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, and the twelve sons of Jacob,(i.e. the twelve tribes of Israel), as being the "Chosen People of God".
     From within the God's Chosen people, God also chose individuals to act as "prophets or judges". Such people as Moses, Samuel, Jeremiah, Daniel, Samson, Isaiah, Jonah and many others were called upon by God to proclaim His truths, warnings, blessings and the coming of the Messiah (Christ) to the nation of Israel and the Gentiles. Other people from the nation of Israel were chosen to be part of the "lineage of Christ". Matthew chapter 1 and Luke chapter 3, give ample evidence for this. Or, if you want a great study, you can follow the lineage of Christ through the Bible starting with Adam then Seth, and so on, to see God's selection process throughout many generations. (It takes time, but it really is an interesting study.)
     The information above clearly shows that God has "chosen" people, and a nation in order to have His will accomplished on earth. There are others we have not mentioned  that should be on this list, (i.e. Pharaoh at the time of the exodus, Nebuchanezzar, Herod, Judas Iscariot, etc.) those that were evil in God's sight, yet were used to move the people of  Israel back to him, or move the leaders of Christ's time to crucify our Lord so that the plan of Salvation might be completed.
     
     The fact that God has "chosen, set apart or picked out", is not the real problem in understanding the doctrine of election. The real question that causes problems is, "How did God perform this choosing?". While trying to answer this, three other areas come into play that help to complicate the discussion, (i.e. foreknowledge, predestination and the will of man.) It is usually at this point that tempers flare, discussions turn into arguments and verses are pulled out of context, and the organist starts playing "The Fight Is On".(just kidding! ...we need at least one laugh in here somewhere!)
     It is in the process of trying to answer the question of, "How did God perform this choosing?", that I see the greatest deterioration of proper Bible study techniques and critical analysis. I believe that by examining the passages around the verses normally used to present "election", and by reflecting what is found against God's Character, as best we can, the answers to many questions will become easier to understand.
     There are several passages in Scripture that are used to set the stage for the two major viewpoints on election. Eph. 1: 1-5; Rom. 8:29; and 2 Tim. 1:9. These are the verses on which many theologians differ and have come to two lines of thought. The first is that those who accept Christ and salvation were chosen by God to be saved before the world began.  The second is that God knew who would accept Christ before the world began and, therefore predestinated them to be conformed to the image of His son when Christ returned or we went to be with Him through death. To see which one of these views could be correct we need to examine the above passages carefully.

(Eph. 1:1-5)
        (v1)  Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints which
        are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: (v2) Grace be to you and
        peace, from our God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. (v3)
        Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed
        us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: (v4) According as
        he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should
        be holy and without blame before him in love: (v5) Having predestinated us
        unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the 
        good pleasure of his will,...
     
     Verses 4 and 5  definitely state that some one has been "chosen... before the foundation of the world", "predestinated ...unto the adoption..", "according to the good pleasure of his (God) will,..." At first glance, it would seem that 'maybe' everyone who is now a born again Christian; past, present and future, was chosen by God to be saved before we made the choice to accept Christ as Saviour. However, to draw such a conclusion at this early stage of this letter is totally inappropriate.       
     Before coming to any conclusions, we should read the entire letter (which we will not do here, but I strongly encourage you to do so in connection with this study) and then look closer at the above verses along with the rest of this first chapter. 
     In the above verses, look at the words "us" and "we". Who is Paul talking about? At this early point in his letter, he could be talking about all believers, but he could be referring to another group of people. We do know that the letter is addressed to the Ephesians, but are his remarks referring to them in these particular verses. The answer to this is in the verses that follow through verse 14. (Look for more usage of "us" and "we". See if it changes at some point in the letter.)

         



           ...(v6) To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made
          us accepted in the beloved. (v7) In whom we have redemption through
          his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace;
          (v8) Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence;
          (v9) Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to
          his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: (v10) That in the 
          dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together in one all
          things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even
          in him: (v11) In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being 
          predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things
          after the counsel of his own will; (v12) That we should be to the praise 
          of his glory, who first trusted in Christ. (v13) In whom ye also trusted,
          after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in 
          whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
          of promise, (14) which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemp-
          tion of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

     The passage continues with "us and we" through verse 12 of chapter 1, but in verse 13 that all changes to "ye" (you). Because of this change it should be evident that Paul is no longer talking to, or about, the same people he was addressing in verses 1-12. We now have no less than two groups of people that are being referred to in this passage. One group is definitely the Ephesians, verses 13 and 14 are referring to them. If this is correct, then who is Paul talking about in verses 1-12? I believe the answer to this question is found, partly, in chapter 2, verses 19 -22.

        2:(19) Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but 
           fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; (20) 
           And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus 
           Christ himself being the chief cornerstone; (21) In whom all the 
      building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord:
           (22) In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God
 through the Spirit.

     By comparing chapter 2:19-22 with chapter 1:1-14, it becomes very clear that Paul is talking about the "Apostles" and maybe even the "Prophets" in chapter 1:1-12. Verses 4-12 of chapter 1, is describing the "choosing" process that God used to set apart the apostles and prophets for His work, rather than making a "blanket statement" concerning all believers and how they are saved. Verse 12 has a particular phrase that backs up this view, " ...,who first trusted in Christ." The Apostles were definitely some of the first people to trust in Christ and they were given the task of  telling others about Christ, (Matt. 28:16-20; Mark 16:14-18). 
    







      
     Therefore, the first part of chapter 1 of Ephesians should be viewed as referring to the apostles and prophets rather than all believers in general. In chapter 2 verses 18-22, this view is reinforced by Paul's own description of  the apostles and prophets, with Christ as the chief cornerstone, as the foundation of God's plan of salvation.
Eph. 2:18-22
For through Him we both have access by one Spirit to the Father.
Now, therefore, you are no longer strangers and foreigners,
but fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God,
having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets,
Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone,
in whom the whole building, being fitted together,
grows into a holy temple in the Lord, in whom you also are being
built together for a dwelling place of God in the Spirit.

     It should be clear by now that the above passages are referring to the unique position that God gave to the apostles and prophets in order to proclaim the coming of the Messiah and to provide 'eyewitnesses' to proclaim the truth, and fact, of Christ's coming. John 17: 6-26 makes mention of this 'eyewitness' position that the apostles had.
John 17;6-8 & 16-21
"I have manifested Your name to the men whom You have given Me out of this world.
They were Yours, You gave them to Me, and they have kept Your word.
Now they have known that all things which You have given Me are from You.
For I have given to them the words which You have given Me;
and they have received them, and have known surely that I came forth from You;
and they have believe that You sent Me."
v.16-21
"They are not of this world, just as I am not of this world.
Sanctify them by Your truth. Your word is truth.
As You sent Me into the world, I also have sent them into the world.
And for their sakes I sanctify Myself, that they also may be sanctified by the truth.
I do not pray for these alone, but also for those who will believe in Me through their word;
that they all may be one, as You, Father, are in Me, and in You;
that they also may be one in Us,
that the world may believe that You sent Me." 

        In regard to the question we are trying to answer, "How did God perform this choosing?" We can say that the Ephesians passage does not support the claim that all those who accept Christ and salvation were chosen by God to be saved before the world began, without exercise of their own "will". It does however, apply to the apostles and prophets. The passage in John 17, definitely refers to the apostles being 'given to Christ' so that they would be 'witnesses' to the fact of His coming. (i.e. eyewitnesses)
      There are several other passages that speak to the fact of the apostles being 'eyewitnesses' of the coming of Christ. They include; 1 Peter 1:8-12; 1 John 1:1-4; John 1:1-14 and many more. It is important to realize the importance of the 'eyewitness' accounts of Christ's coming in relation to the Calvinistic concept of God's choosing. If Calvin had been correct in his study, the eyewitness accounts of Paul and all the other apostles would be obscured by the claim that 'all believers' were chosen to be saved. This is exactly what has happened over the course of Calvinistic teaching. Satan would love nothing more than to be able to claim that there never were any  eye witnesses to the coming of Christ!

     Moving right along, Romans chapter 8: 28-31 is another passage that is used in an effort to explain the validity of the doctrine of election. (according to Calvin)
Rom. 8:28-31
         (v28) And we know that all things work together for good to them
          that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.
          (v29) For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be 
          conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn
          among many brethren. (v30) Moreover whom he did predestinate,
          them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and
          whom he justified, them he also glorified. (31) What shall we say to
          these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? 

     The phrase, "...he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son," has been used as a proof text in support of the view that all believers in Christ were predestined to be saved, because of God's counsel to do so before the world began. Before forming any conclusions, it would be best to examine the verses in chapter 8 that precede this passage.
Rom. 8;18-25
         (v18) For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
          to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. (19) For
          the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of
          sons of God. (v20) For the creature was made subject to vanity, not will-
          ingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, (v21)
          Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of
          corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God. (v22) For we
          know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until
          now. (v23) And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits
          of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the
          adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.(v24) For we are saved by 
          hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he 
          yet hope for? (v25) But if we hope for that we see not, then do with 
 patience wait for it. 
(Verses 26 and 27 tell of how the Spirit helps our infirmities in prayer.)

     Within  this passage, the main thought is concerned with the "future". The variety of words to describe this have been "accented" in the above quote. Because the future is the main emphasis, it is not logically correct to assume that verse 29 can be interpreted to mean,"predestined to salvation", as some might contend. It is more likely that it is referring to our future condition at the time of Christ's return or when we meet him at the time of death. At which time we will receive a new and glorified body, freed from sin and corruption. Therefore, it is quite inaccurate to use this passage to claim that people were "predestined to be saved", without there being a choice on their part. It is also incorrect to assume that the phrase "...he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son," means Salvation. This assumption does not have a proper foundation.
     (A fuller understanding of this "struggle" in the flesh can be obtained by looking back in Romans to chapters 5,6 and 7, where Paul goes into detail about the conflicts of the law vs. grace, and his own struggle with doing wrong vs. right; Rom.7:15-25.)



   The third passage that is sighted in relation to "election", is found in 2 Timothy 1:9, but before looking at the passage, we need to examine some of the background information surrounding the occasion of its writing. It was written by the Apostle Paul during his second imprisonment in Rome. This imprisonment was different from the first in that he was now confined in what was probably a dungeon cell and he was kept in chains.(see verse 15-17 of chapt. 1) It is also the general consent of all Christian antiquity that Paul was never released from this imprisonment, but was martyred some time between A.D.66  or shortly after A.D. 67. Some have placed Paul's death to have been on June 29th A.D. 66. This would place the writing of  2 Timothy just prior to Paul's execution by Nero. Possibly A.D. 65. Some have placed the writing of this book as late as A.D. 67.
     At the time of  2 Timothy, Nero was slaughtering Christians in every way he could find. Christians had fled to every part of the world to escape the slaughter that Nero was inflicting on believers. Several years later, A.D. 70, Jerusalem would be destroyed.
     Paul's writings to Timothy are those of an imprisoned man who is trying to encourage a beloved younger brother in Christ, who is watching first hand the death and destruction being imposed on the world around him.
2 Tim.1; 6-10
          (v6) Wherefore, I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift
          of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. (v7) For God
          hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and a 
          sound mind. (v8) Be not thou, therefore, ashamed of the testimony of 
          our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but be thou partaker of the afflictions
          of the gospel according to the power of God; (v9) Who hath saved us,
          and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but 
          according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ 
          Jesus before the world began, (v10) But is now made manifest by the
          appearing of our Savior, Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and 
          hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel,...
     This beautiful passage has also been used as a proof text  to support the claim that we were,(as mentioned earlier) saved before the foundations of the world, and had no choice in this selection. This passage does not suggest that individuals didn't have a choice in accepting or rejecting salvation. It is in fact, stating that Christ was chosen before the world began as the sacrifice for sin and the redemption of the world. That Christ was "chosen" is not a problem. To say that all those who were to be saved, and had no choice in this selection is an unwarranted assumption.
     In all the passages that we have looked at so far, there has been mention of the concepts of predestination, foreknowledge and  the will of man. I have delayed explaining these terms in order to concentrate on the passages in question. However, we can avoid them no longer. It is my conviction that by examining part of God's character called "omniscience", we can gain a better understanding of the areas in question.
    The theological term called "omniscience" means; "to have infinite knowledge". The word itself is not used in scripture, but there are adequate references to support this aspect of God's character.  Systematic Theology; by Berkhof, describes the attribute as follows:
         The knowledge of God. The knowledge of God may be defined as 
          that perfection of God whereby He, in an entirely unique manner, 
          knows Himself and all things possible and actual in one eternal
          and most simple act. The Bible testifies to the knowledge of God
          abundantly, as, for instance, in 1 Samuel 2:3; Job 12:13; Psalms 94:9;
          147:4; Isaiah 29:15; 40:27,28....(p.66)
     
     Because God has infinite knowledge that spans the past, present and future, He already knows what will happen tomorrow, next week, or ten years from now. This is difficult for our finite minds to comprehend since we are "bound",as it were, by time. However, since time is one of God's creations,(see Gen.1:14-19) he is "outside" of time as we know it. Therefore, it becomes possible for God to actually "make" a plan that spans eternity past, present and future yet never leave His present "eternal" position. This may sound like just "so much gibberish", but it isn't. This actually gives us a point of origin to help answer the question  we started with at the beginning of this paper,  "How did God perform this choosing?".
     If we understand even a small portion of the above description of God's character, we can understand that God's "foreknowledge" (knowing the future in an infinite way), along with God being "omnipotent" (i.e. all powerful), would allow him to make and execute the plan for redeeming mankind and, know "who would accept Christ as savour", before it happens. Also, it becomes easy to understand that God can have a completed plan for our future without interfering with man's will to choose. (refer back to the discussion on Rom.8:28-31).
     In all fairness to the information we have seen, it may still have been God's design to predestinate the Prophets and Apostles to their work in order to complete the plan of salvation for the world. However, at the same time there are examples in scripture that give support for the view that they did have a choice in this matter, but only a slim one.
     For example Moses, in Exodus chapter 3 and 4, wasn't exactly thrilled with the idea of going back to Egypt where he had killed a man. He argued with God to the point that God was angered with him and his complaints. Moses definitely exercised his desire to "choose" in that situation. Also, Abraham and Sarah managed to make a number of independent choices that were not part of the original promise God made to them.(see Gen.chapt.. 12-23).
     Finally, Jonah (I saved the best for last), exercised his will not to go to Nineveh, and took a slow boat in the opposite direction. Meanwhile, God was preparing a way to "bend Jonah's will to His". It was a bit "fishy", but Jonah learned a "whale" of a lesson that day about obeying God's commands.(sorry, I couldn't resist the temptation) I don't believe that Jonah was happy about going to Nineveh even after his experience in the belly of a great fish. Later, he complained to God because God had not destroy Nineveh as planned. They had repented, but Jonah chose to stay angry with God.
     There is one last area we should cover before we bring to a close this short, and incomplete study. That is the subject of "Predestination". In the study we have been doing, this word has come up several times. It means, "to mark out beforehand". It is the same Greek word that is used for, "determine". We have seen in this study how God's omni - science has played a part in His predestinating Christ as the sacrifice for our sins. We have also seen how God has predestined believers to be "conformed to the image of his Son" in the future when Christ returns or we go to be with Him. There are viewpoints, however, that take this much farther.
     When I was ay Moody Bible Institute, there was a student there that honestly believed that God had "predestined" his life in every area. This included when he ate, went to bed, showered, everything! It was an interesting problem. I found later that there are people who do believe this view to be correct, based on the same verses we have been studying. If they are correct, then there are many questions that need to be answered in order to validate this viewpoint. I'll leave you to think of a few of them on your own.







-Summery and Observations-

     This study has taken us through a great deal of information concerning "election" and other areas. It has not been exhaustive by any means, but I do believe we can make some decisions based on what we have found.
     First, it is safe to say that by broadening our study to include more then just the primary verses, made it possible to see that the belief that  people were; "chosen to be saved before the world began", without having a choice in the matter, is not the primary meaning within the verses in question.
     Second, the Ephesians passage normally used for a proof text for election and predestination, should be used to show the importance of the Prophets and Apostles as the people who were given the "foundational" task, by God, to proclaim the coming Messiah; and later to explain the mystery of  salvation through Christ.
     Third, God's omniscience, omnipotence, foreknowledge as well as the fact that he can exist outside of  time as we know it; make it possible for Him to create plans that exist in the past, present and future all at the same moment of  HIS existence (whatever that may be.) 
     Finally, I wish to state that I make no apologies for the method that has been used in conducting this study. I sincerely believe that too often we become lacks in our Bible study methods to the point that our conclusions do not reflect the truth of God's word. Also, we fail to include the background of the author or the overall meaning of the book being studied in our efforts to understand smaller passages. This leads to unwarranted speculation
and incorrect teaching on important scriptural doctrines. Lastly, and regrettably, the Character of God is too often left out of our final interpretation of  HIS  Word . It is His Word! ...We are finite!... HE IS INFINITE ! 
     


-Bibliography-

Bibles:
1.  Green, Jay, The Interlinear Hebrew / Greek / English  Bible; Assoc. Pub.and Authors
                       Wilmington, Delaware; 1976  ( 4 vol.)
2.  New Scofield Reference Bible;  New York- Oxford University Press, Inc.; 1967
3.  Thompson,Frank C., The New Chain Reference Bible; B.B. Kirkbride Bible Co., Inc.,
                        Indianapolis, Indiana; 1964
4.  The Parallel New Testament and Unger's Bible Handbook; The Iverson-Norman  
                        Associates, New York, N.Y.; Produced for Moody Monthly, Chicago,
                        Ill.; 1975
5.  Wuest, Kenneth S., The New Testament: An Expanded Translation;William B.                        
                        Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids, Michigan; 1970

Other sources:
1.   Berkhof, L., Systematic Theology; William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand
                        Rapids, Michigan;1972 (12th printing)
2.   Clarke, Adam, LL.D., F.S.A., &c., Clarkes Commentary and Critical Notes; Eaton
                        & Mains, New York; Jennings & Pye, Cincinnati, Ohio; 1884 (6 vol.)
3.   Fogarty, Daniel, S.J., Roots for A New Rhetoric; By Russell & Russell a division of
                        Atheneum House, Inc., New York; 1968   
4.   Norton-Taylor, Duncan, God's Man a Novel on the Life of John Calvin; Baker Book    
                        House, Grand Rapids, Michigan;1979
5.   Larkin, Rev.Clarence, Rightly Dividing The Word; Erwin W. Moyer Company,   
                        Printers, Philadelphia 32, Pa.; (no date of printing)
6.   Pache, Rene, The Inspiration and Authority of Scripture; translated by, Helen I.   
                        Needham, The Moody Bible Institute of Chicago, Ill.;1971
7.   Robertson, Archibald Thomas, Word Pictures In The New Testament; Broadman     
                        Press, Nashville, Tennessee; 1933 (6 vol.)
8.   Strong, James; S.T.D., L.L.D.; The Exhaustive Concordance of The Bible; Abington-
                        Cokesbury Press; New York - Nashville, 1944 ed.
9.   Thiessen, Henry C., Lectures in Systematic Theology;William B.Eerdmans Publishing                   
                         Company, Grand Rapids, Michigan; 1971
10.   Thonssen, Lester; Baird, Craig A.; Braden, Waldo W., Speech Criticism; The Ronald  
                        Press Company, New York, N.Y.; 1970
11.  Torrey, R.A., What The Bible Teaches; Fleming H. Revell Company, New York, 
                        N.Y.; copyright 1898-1933
12. Vine, W.E.; Unger, Merrill F.; White, William, Jr.; Vine's Complete Expository 
                        Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words; Thomas Nelson Publishers,
                        1984
13. Walvoord, John F., Jesus Christ Our Lord; The Moody Bible Institute of Chicago,     
                        Ill.;1971
14. Young, Robert, LL.D.; Analytical Concordance to the Bible; William B.Eerdmans               
                        Publishing Company, Grand Rapids, Michigan; 1972


                        

- A Personal Note -

     There are probably some of you who have read this paper, that have already figured out, to a point, where I stand on the doctrine of "election". Others may still be wondering.
Well, I'm not going to tell you, so there! (just kidding, writing all this does make a person a bit scatter-brained)
     Truthfully, my convictions on this subject are as follows:
     First, as you've probably guessed, I am not a Calvinist. I do not consider myself to be a one, two, three, four, or even a five point Calvinist. However, I am not an Arminian either! (For those of you might not know, the Arminian belief is considered to be at the other end of the spectrum from Calvinism.). In my own personal studies on the subject of election and the person of Christ, I have found that I cannot agree with either side of this issue. The Arminian position includes the belief that a person can lose their salvation. I find no passages of scripture, when properly researched, that supports this claim. Nor do I find it to be consistent with God's character. On the other hand, Calvinism has gone too far in the opposite direction, to the point that the only people who are saved are those who were chosen by God before the world began and there was no choice in the matter. This causes an incredible conflict between man's will,(which is demonstrated to exist at the fall as well as other places), God' Sovereignty, predestination, foreknowledge and more.
     I have used, for a little over twenty years now, a method of study, Rhetorical Criticism, (which is very much 'a-kin' to the Biblical method of Hermeneutics) that stems from my college degree. By using this method, (which includes knowing the background of the author, taking the subject matter as a whole, understanding the ethnic or cultural implications of phrases used, and more.), it opens up a more indepth and broader understanding of what the writer or speaker is trying to get across. This, plus using other Bible study methods learned at Moody Bible Institute, allows me to analyze scripture in a more thorough manner.
     My personal conclusion on  election is that God chose to create a plan to save mankind, whom He deeply "agapes", by "choosing" his own Son to be the needed sacrifice for mankind's sin. Whereby, creating the only way that mankind could "choose" to return to God. The plan, and execution of that plan, are all in the control of the Almighty God 100%. The ability to accept or reject God's free gift of salvation is in the exercise of man's will. At the time a person receives God's forgiveness for sin through Christ, that person is seen by God, through the blood of Christ, as perfect before Him (i.e. Justification). That same person is also "predestined" to be "conformed to the image of Christ at the time of Christ's return, or when that person goes to be with our Lord through death." The period of  "human time" between acceptance of Christ and being conformed to His image is a time of spiritual growth and drawing closer to God in Christ, as well as telling others of  God's love for them. (i.e. Sanctification)  
     May Our Lord God of Heaven and Earth, help us all to dig deep into His word so that we may be better equipped to reach out to our brothers and sisters in Christ in love, and lead back to Him those who are still separated from His love because of sin.

                                                                         Sincerely in Christ,  
                                                                         Daniel C. Conley




