 
- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                 by: Dan Conley

- An Endangered Species -
(The Death of a Species)

     Have you ever seen an Ox? They are large beasts, much like a bull, that have tremendous power. They have been used throughout history as beasts of burden. Hauling heavy loads, pulling out tree stumps, plowing the earth to prepare it for planting. They have been harnessed to ancient machines used for turning water wheels and grinding corn and more. They are powerful beasts that have helped mankind for thousands of years to complete difficult and often monitions tasks.
     The Bible speaks of  oxen in many places. In Deuteronomy 25:4, in a portion of the laws given to the people through Moses we find; "You shall not muzzle the ox while he is threshing", in I Kings 19:19 we read about Elijah going to find Elisha;
                    "So he departed from there and found  Elisha the son of Shaphat,
                    while he was plowing with twelve pairs of oxen before him, and he
                    with the twelfth. And Elijah passed over to him and threw his 
                    mantle on him."                                (N.A.S.)
     Other passages in the Old Testament are not very flattering for this powerful creature. Proverbs 7:22 tells of an ox being led to slaughter in a similar manner as a fool gets involved with a harlot. Proverbs 15:17 compares a fattened (well fed) ox where there hatred to a dish of vegetables where there is love. 
     In the New Testament, the Apostle Paul refers to the Deuteronomy passage (mentioned above), to support the argument that those who go out to preach the gospel should not be denied the necessities of life or even some of its comforts. (I Corinthians 9: 1-14) A similar argument is found in I Timothy 5: 18.
     There is also a verse in Proverbs that could stand as a warning about not using these great animals for the work which God has them the ability to do.
                         "Where no oxen are, the crib (or manger) is clean;
                           but much increase is by the strength of the ox."
                                                                  Poverbs 14:4 (K.J.V.)
                                 
     It is well documented fact that at one time millions of  buffalo lived throughout the western states of America grazing on the grasses and roaming across the vast  open plains. As settlers moved into the western states they began killing the buffalo by the millions. They were killed for  food, clothing and a great number of them simply for sport. Within a few short years the millions of buffalo that had once roamed throughout the west were reduced to a dangerously low number. They were close to extinction and had become an endangered species.
     
