
- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                            by: Dan Conley
  (written about 1984)
- The Reality of Faith -
(Part - I)

    Between 1978 and about 1981, I reached a  real "slump" in my Christian life. I had little or no desire to read the Bible, and going to church was about as exciting as watching dust collect on a fence post. Life was not good! As a matter of fact, when I tried to open the Bible to read it, I often wondered if I really believed it at all. I had been a Christian since the mid 1950's and here I was wondering if it was all true! 
    I kept trying to read the Bible, but I couldn't get interested in any passage. I'd flip from one book to another, this passage to that passage, and finally close it up and walk away. My interest was close to zero. I was tired of just sitting down and reading the Bible simply because I was "suppose to", or out of "habit". I needed more than just a "routine". I wanted something that I could use in the "real world", but I didn't know what "it" was or how to get "it". Then, slowly, things started to change.
    I actually stopped reading the Bible for awhile, thinking that maybe I had "over saturated" myself  and needed a break. Having been involved in Christian work in one form or another for quite a while, I felt a bit "burned out" and "used". I knew that, eventually, I would get back into the scriptures, but I needed a break and a different way of studying the Bible. What came to me seemed easy. Actually, too easy! Almost silly! I thought that since I was having such a hard time, I would simply take one small passage of scripture, and read it over and over until I got something out of it, or just got tired of reading it. That was the first step. The next step took a little longer. Finding what I was still interested in!
    Many subjects came to mind. Most of them I had gone over so many times, or heard from various speakers that I could almost quote them from memory,(not that my memory is any good...'cuz it ain't). To be precise, the only passage of scripture I found any interest in was Hebrews 11 : 1-6. I read it over and over! For the better part of three months! There was something in this passage that I couldn't get away from. It was like God had "planted" me on these few verses and wasn't going to let me go until I got the message. 

"Now faith is the substance of things hoped for,
 the evidence of things not seen.
 For by it the elders received witness.
Through faith we understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God,
so that things which are seen were not made of 
things which do appear.
By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain, 
by which he obtained witness that he was righteous,
God testifying of his gifts; and by it he being dead
yet speaketh.
                                 



           
-2-
By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
 death, and was not found, because God had
 translated him;
for before his translation he had this testimony,
that he pleased God.
But without faith it is impossible to please him;
for he that cometh to God must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him."   
Hebrews 11:1-6 (KJV)

     Finally, I saw something in the first verse that I had been missing every time I read it. Faith was being "defined" with words that didn't fit with what I had been taught to accept as "faith". The faith that I understood was more in line with "take a chance, you can't see it but believe it anyway". Faith was not grounded in something you could "see", it was spiritual. It was unseen. But verse one was saying that faith had "substance, things and evidence". By definition these words are indicating something that has "mass", or can be "visually verified" in some way. This was not the faith I had been taught It was not the kind of faith I had been practicing. I had come face to face with the horrifying fact that my "faith" was not a scriptural "faith"! This is what God was trying to get me to see. This is where He wanted me to start..... So I did. I looked up all the words in verse 1 of Hebrews chapter 11 and found a new kind of faith that cannot be moved!
    
- Definitions of the words found in Hebrews 11 : 1 - 

     I am aware that a rather large number of people don't really get excited about looking up the definition of words. On the scale of, "exciting things to do today", it would probably be listed in the same category as, "watching the linoleum in your kitchen grow". So, if you'll "hang in there" with me, I'll try to keep this as brief and painless as possible. 
     The words we will be looking at are; substance, things, hoped and evidence. These are used in the K.J.V.. Other translations will be different, but it doesn't change the final outcome of this exercise. The first word (substance) I will show in detail, including a number of references that were used to get a clear definition. For the rest of the words in the list I will only give the final definition in order to save time. However, all the words in the list were examined in the same manner. When you can find the time, you should study them on your own. It's a real "eye opener".




-3-
 
(definitions cont.)

     1.Substance: The New American Standard Bible, and others, translate it as "assurance". Vine's Expository Dictionary suggests a translation of, "...confidence, assurance". The word assurance has a positive thrust which suggests a "guarantee or knowledge", that allows an acceptance of a proposition or idea that is worthy of support. This assurance can be past or present in origin. 
     The New Testament An Expanded Translation, by Kenneth S. Wuest, the word substance is translated "title deed". It implies "ownership", in the same way a person has a "deed of ownership", to prove he really does own his house and property.
     The Interlinear Greek - English New Testament, by Rev. A. Marshall, translates  substance as; "(the) really".
     From the above definitions, we have to conclude that "substance" is not speaking of something that is fiction, but of firm supportive facts. It is not some sort of  mystical philosophy that has no foundation. It is somehow connected to the real world that has "mass", and in some way can be examined. It is our "assurance, title deed and reality", that gives our faith a firm and real foundation from which to grow.

2. Things: (Webster's New World Dictionary; 2nd College ed.), 1. Any matter, circumstance, affair, or concept. This definition goes on to include no less than eleven areas, or ways, that "things" can be defined.
     It may seem trivial to examine the definition of "things". However, it becomes valuable when we see that the things we hope for can easily include the material world, spiritual world, or "non-tangibles" such as love, peace, etc..

3. Hoped: (hope), A favorable and confident expectation of the unseen future. The happy anticipation of good.
     No matter what reference material you might use, this word stands out as being "positive in its meaning". Hope is a "confident expectation". It is possible to have an "evil hope", (i.e. desiring something bad to happen, or a sinful desire.). However, even in this the positive thrust of "hope" remains in tack, though the "thing" hoped for is negative.
     
4. Evidence: (Grk.- "Elegmos") a reproof,...a proof, proving, test. Something that tends to prove; grounds for belief, etc.
     The strength of this word is similar to that of  legal evidence that would be presented at a trial. The evidence presented would be combined to make what is called, "prima facie evidence". It is evidence that is adequate to establish a fact or a presumption of fact unless refuted. (i.e. "air tight" case. It should be noted that this is evidence that is grounded in God's truth, as apposed to any other concept of truth.)



                                                           (4)

     There is one more definition we should look at in order to understand the importance and function of faith. That is the definition of faith itself. Vine' Expository Dictionary (p.222) states that it is "...primarily, 'firm persuasion,' a conviction based upon hearing...". (For a complete description see  p. 222 of Vine's. There's not enough time to put it all in here.) From James 2:17-18, we find that a vital part of faith is that it has action, and without this action faith has little meaning or value.
          (17) Even so faith, if it has no works, is dead, being by itself. 
          (18) But some one may well say, "You have faith, 
                  and I have works; show me your faith without the works,
                  and I will show you my faith by my works."
                                                             (N.A.S.)

     The point here is that faith requires action in order for it to function properly. This is where there is a difference between faith and believing. We can believe in many things and never have to take action on that belief. However, faith, by definition, requires an action of some sort in order for it to be complete. The fact that it takes an action to demonstrate that we truly have faith, dictates that it must involve "reality" in some way.
     To help us all keep from getting so bored with all this, and going "face down" in our dinner plate, let's conclude this section by doing two things; 1) What makes up the "substance, hope and evidence" for us as Christians. 2) An expanded definition of faith that includes the items found in 1).
     1) The substance of our faith is God and Christ as being "real". Not simply a spiritual "being", or a philosophical concept, but the true and living God. Next; the person and work of Christ in real time and real space. It actually happened in time and space. Christ's coming to earth, dieing on the cross and rising again to complete the plan of salvation is a recorded fact of history. No less! 
     The evidence that proves that the substance of our faith is real can be found in three basic areas. In the Bible, which records God's working with mankind throughout history, as well as the testimony of hundreds of people who have been personally involved with His activities on earth. Second, creation itself. The earth we live on, even though marred by sin, still shows forth the glory, power and infinite character of God. Finally, the change that comes on a person who truly receives Christ as Savior. Finding the reality of Christ and God's love is without a doubt an on going  evidence to the reality of the substance of  faith.
     The hope of our faith is the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that we will be with Him is heaven for eternity. Also, that He will guide us, and provide for our needs, through this life on earth so that we might live for Him each day in accordance to His will. The foundation for this hope is based on the substance and evidence mentioned about.
                          
                     

(5)

2) Definition: (Conley expanded version)

                   "Faith consists of actions, either in a spiritual or material realm, 
                    toward future events or goals. 
                    The actions that are taken are based on factual  events of the past that
                    give credence or support to the events that are hoped for in the future.
                    For true believers, the actions taken are based on the reality of God 
                    and His ability, unchanging truth, power and love to fulfill the 
                    scriptural promises given to us, as well as guide us in our 
                    daily lives in accordance with God's will in Christ."

     There are two things that came out of this study that helped me. First, I found out that faith had to have "wheels of action" on it before it would work in a scriptural way. Second, this study caused a renewed interest in studying scripture that has not stopped. It got me into studying the men and women of faith that are listed in Hebrews 11. This, in turn, blossomed into studying the "whole" of scripture.
     I can imagine some people saying to themselves; "That was okay, but so what? How does this help me?" Or, "How do you make this work in the real world?" I don't blame you! I had to ask myself the same questions. Studying all this was easy compared to putting it into practice! I'll tell you what I did to try and find the answers to these questions in (Part - II) of "The Reality of Faith".                                                  

 

      
     
     
         

  

     

                              
        

