
-Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                  by: Dan Conley

- The Reality of Faith -
(Part - II)
(written early months of 2004)

      If you have looked at the date when I wrote the first part of 'The reality of Faith' and checked it against the date I am writing 'Part - II', the obvious question is; "What took you so long?". Well, after writing the first part, I realized that I didn't have enough personal experience in order to properly explain how all this works. Now that I've been trying to 'practice what I preach' for over twenty years, I believe I can now put on paper some of things we need to do in order to make this a reality in our own lives. Also, I must tell you of some unwanted dangers and sorrows that come with a life of walking in the 'Reality of Faith'.
     Faith requires action before it works in a proper spiritual way. Too often our faith is more like a car that has been sitting on "blocks" in the garage for twenty years. It may be clean and polished, but it's worthless as a mode of transportation without the wheels. Or, we get in the drivers seat, crank up the engine, open the garage door, put it in gear, stomp on the gas and with a  terrific cloud of exhaust smoke and noise; ..., it still just sits there!  So what's wrong? How do we go about putting "wheels" on our faith and getting it off its "blocks"so that it will work properly in the real world? This was what I had to resolve in my own life. But first, a quick review of the definition of faith from Part - I.
    
Definition: (Conley expanded version)

                   "Faith consists of actions, either in a spiritual or material realm, 
                    toward future events or goals. 
                    The actions taken are based on factual  events of the past that
                    give credence or support to those events that are hoped for in
                    the immediate or distant future.
                    For true believers, the actions of faith that we take are based on
                    the reality of God and Christ. Their unchanging truth and power 
                    to fulfill the promises given to us in scripture and to help us in our 
                    daily lives in accordance with God's will."

     It was time for me to quit messing around and figure out how to get my 'faith in God's ability to get things done' and my 'actions' functioning together in this (so called) real world. It was time for me to take the first step, and believe me it was not easy! Talking about it and reading about letting God be in control is easy. Actually doing it in reality, is like stepping off a cliff where there is suppose to be a bridge, but you can't see it!  (If you've seen 'Indiana Jones and The Last Crusade' , you'll know what I'm talking about). The fear of failure will stop most people before they even take the first step. But I had to take this first step! I believed in God, but did I believe in Him to the point of really letting Him control every part of my life. The battle was on inside me . I was about to step out in faith in God like I had never done before.
     (2)
     Toward the end of 1980 - 1986, the construction industry took a severe nose dive in the San Francisco Bay area and the rest of California. Because of it I found myself out of work, low on money, and not knowing what to do. It was also the same period of time I had been studying faith. These two events had come together at the same time, and in such a way as to put me in the position of either letting God be in control of my life, or stumbling aimlessly around on my own power. I wanted God's way, but was unsure how to get started. So I prayed. I confessed to God that I didn't know what to do, or even how to go about letting Him be in control. I asked Him to show me what He wanted me to do and how He wanted me to accomplish it. The answer I got over several weeks of praying and seriously trying to listen to His voice was to start an "architectural drafting business". 
     This may not sound all that unusual to you who are reading this, but there were two major problems standing in my way. First, it was the worst possible time to try and start a drafting business that was for architectural purposes. Construction was down and a large number of contractors were going out of business. Second, I had no idea what I was doing! The last architectural drafting that I had done was in a class my senior year in high school in 1968. However, the one thing I had going for me is that I knew that this really was what God wanted me to do. 
     The answer to the second part of my prayer, (how He wanted me to accomplish it) was simply to make up some business cards and hand them out as the opportunities presented themselves. No other advertising! If God was really in charge of this, then I would have to make sure that I was not in His way by trying to use standard business methods. This was the first and primary lesson I learned about having your faith in God. To ask God what He wanted instead of me 'telling Him' what I wanted Him to do for me. God will and does work, but before He does, we have to get out of His way. This was the hardest thing for me to do. At times it is still hard to let His will control my life as it should and far to easy for me to get in His way! This type of battle is not new, it goes all the way back to the fall of Adam and Eve and is depicted quite vividly in the confrontation between Cain and his brother Able. Who's in control? You'll have to answer that question on your own.
      So far, I now knew what He wanted me to do and how He wanted me to do it. The fact that I didn't have a name for this new company, no money to run it was okay!  The only things I  had to work with were a small 24" drafting board (not a table) a "T" square, a 45 degree triangle, a drafting pencil and a couple of pieces of small drafting paper I bought at a local store.
      Next I learned that when we honestly want to 'walk with Him' , He brings the people into our life that He will use to direct us. This happened to me while I was trying to come up with a good name for this yet 'unborn drafting business'. We had gone to visit my wife's sister (Marie) and brother-in-law and while having ice cream we were discussing my new adventure and what to call it. In the process, Marie said something about how I seem to be making a 'fine line'  about all this company name idea. When I heard 'fine line' it was like something  bit me and I said "that's it"! (I honestly do not remember what Marie was even talking about that made her say "fine line", but that was the name that stuck.). It was as if the Holy Spirit made my insides jump when I heard the name. I knew it was the one God wanted, and best of all I knew that I had nothing to do with it. God gave the name to me through my sister-in-law. 
      After a lot of prayer and discussions with my wife, 'Conley's Fine Line Drafting Service' became a reality on the 1st of January 1981.  I had very little money and no clients, but there it was. It would take too much time to tell of all the ways I watched God supply drafting jobs. However, the method of getting drafting jobs was simple, I prayed each week that God would provide a drafting job for the following week and gave out a small business card to those who asked for one. Almost without exception a drafting job came in.      
    
(3)
     This is another important part of being able to know the 'reality of faith' in your life. Continued prayer on a daily basis. Not just an hour a day, but an attitude of prayer all day long, day in and day out. Just because I had His answer for the first part of this adventure, doesn't mean I had all the answers. However, it was still a wondrous time of watching God work and to know that He really was guiding us (as long as I kept out of the way).   
     The first two years of this little business I earned a whopping $5,700 the first year and $6,700 the second. With Gay working part time as a nurse we were able to make all the "ends" meet so the bills were paid. However, in early 1982 we found out that Gay was pregnant and the baby was due sometime in late December. This would change everything!
     In late October 1982, I was becoming more concerned about our financial situation. I knew that the responsibility rested with me to find a way to increase our income. After all babies don't come cheap! (They don't come with coupon books or instruction manuals either!) The only way that I could increase my income was to increase my number of clients. There were two ways of doing this. First, I could launch an advertising campaign or I could pray and tell God what I needed. I chose to pray. On October 29th I prayed and thanked God for how He had been supplying our needs for the past two years. I told Him (as if He didn't know already) that we had a child coming and that what I was making now was not enough to meet the up coming needs. I thanked Him in advance for His supplying our needs. On November 5th I had five calls from people who needed drafting for upcoming additions. God had heard, and was answering in abundance.
     On January 4th, 1983 Jeremy was born. That same year my little business earned over $16,000. God knew our needs and met them. When Jeremy was born it was necessary for Gay to have a "cesarean section". The insurance only covered about 80% of the cost. We had to pay out of pocket over $1500. Later, when Jeremy was 4 months old, he had to have surgery  for two hernias in his lower abdomen. Again the insurance didn't cover the total cost of this surgery and we had to pay out close to $2000. It was God's increasing of my work load that kept us from going deep into debt. God continued to provide!
     From November of 1982 until we left California and moved to Colorado in 1989, my earnings from this little business never dropped below $15,000 a year. God continued to supply in every area. Prayer had given us God's will to start a business and it was prayer that showed us that it was God's timing for us to move on.
     At this point I should warn you about a 'problem' that we (my wife and I) ran into concerning how other people viewed what we were doing while trying our best to keep our faith in God's ability to direct us. It involves a move we made in 1985. 
     We had been talking about selling our house and relocating for some time, but where we were to relocate was still unknown. Just prior to the first house being sold, we were told that a gentleman that we knew from church ( to maintain privacy, let me call him George) had a small house that he needed to sell. But there were a few problems. Rather serious problems with his son-in-law, which we will not discuss in this presentation, except to say that they were severe enough that George was regrettably forced to sell the house in which his daughter and son-in-law lived.
     After hearing about the situation and asking God what He wanted us to do, we purchased the house from George for $73,000. It was a great price, but the house was left in a shambles. We braced ourselves for the task of cleaning out garbage, cat urine and dung covered carpets, urine soaked sheetrock in the bathroom, patching holes in the sheetrock where George's son-in-law had angrily punched in the walls, etc.. I think you get the picture. It was a mess! When I opened the single-garage door, the trash and junk was two feet high by the door and went all the way up to the ceiling at the back. I took an amazed look and shut the door. I told my wife I would get to it after we got the house to a livable state. At one point, a friend of the family came by to look. As he stood at the front door he stopped and rolled up his pant legs before coming in any farther.
     
(4) 
    We knew that God had directed us to purchase this house in order to help George with a very difficult family problem. However, some people thought that we had done something really crazy. More than that, they thought I was nuts. When I told them that I was going to remodel the house and put an addition on it, they said I should do it with a D-8 Cat. (bulldozer) and they weren't kidding. 
     The warning I have to make is this; Following what God wants you to do is generally not the way most people would do things. God gets things done in His way and in His time. In the book of Ecclesiastes Chapter 8:6 it says; "Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him." Chapter 3:11 says; "He makes every thing beautiful in its time...". These verses are telling us that we need to let God be in control of both our time and decisions that we make on a daily basis. Waiting on God to see things accomplished is not always easy (duh), but that is exactly how our faith in His ability to do things grows. James 1:5 says; "Knowing this, that the testing of your faith (in God) worketh patience."(in letting God do it.). This was one of those situations where God had asked us to do something that did not look right to those around us and the timing looked strange as well. However, this is what He wanted, and that is what we did. Finally, (and I want make this very clear) God never tells us to do something that is contrary to His word! Those who think He does are wrong! 
     There is an upside to this 'house' story. About two years after buying the house, I ran into George's son-in-law. He had cleaned up his act and was back walking with Christ. He apologized for all the damage and garbage he had left behind. More importantly, he told me that if we had not purchased that house (forcing him to leave) he would never have changed his life and gotten right with God. That's the true payoff, ... God wins! That's what this is all about.
     I could easily continue and tell you of many things God has shown us, but the bottom line is that YOU have to find this out for yourself. The truth about 'faith' is that it is not about looking forward to the future all the time and hoping for things you want. It is asking God to show you what He wants you to do, then doing it. Only then can you look back in your own life and be able say; "I know that God helped me there, and there, and here." You can't say this if you never, "Get out of His way" and let Him control your life. When you do, you will be able say; I know that God did this and not me. This becomes your own personal proof of the 'reality of God' and The Reality of Faith in your own life. 
     The message that we need to give to those around us should be of what Christ has done for us in the past. This gives substance to what we can hope for in the future and personal evidence of what can not be seen at this time.

                                                     "Faith is the substance of things hoped for,
                                                                the evidence of things unseen."
                                                                                                       Hebrews 11:1
