- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                 by: Dan Conley

" The Act of Forgiving "

Definitions:
    I. Webster's New World Dictionary;
        forgive; vt. -gave', -giv'en, -giv'ing: 1.to give up resentment against or the desire to  
        punish; stop being angry with; pardon 2. to give up all claim to punish or exact 
        penalty for (an offense); overlook 3. to cancel or remit (a debt) - vi. to show 
        forgiveness; be inclined to forgive -SYN. see absolve
        forgiveness; n. 1. a forgiving or being forgiven; pardon 2. inclination to forgive or 
        pardon
        forgiving; adj. that forgives; inclined to forgive

    II.  Vine's Complete Expository Dictionary of  Old and New Testament Words;
        W.E. Vine, Merrill F. Unger, William White, Jr.; 1985 by Thomas Nelson, Inc. 
        Publishers. (pages 250 & 251)
         forgive, forgave, forgiveness;  Briefly, the definitions found here are similar to  
         those of  Webster with the added concepts of  v."to send forth, send away", or
         "to bestow a favor unconditionally", "to let loose from", "to release". The noun
         form conveys the same concepts. One short paragraph that is worth adding here  
         is as follows: 
              "Human 'forgiveness' is to be strictly *analogous to divine 'forgiveness,' e.g.,
           Matt. 6:12. If certain conditions are fulfilled, there is no limitation to Christ's law 
           of  'forgiveness,'' Matt. 18:21,22. The conditions are repentance and confession,
           Matt. 18:15-17; Luke 17:3."
         (For a fuller reading of this subject, see page 250 & 251 of Vine's Exp. Dictionary)
           * analogous: means similar or comparable in  certain respects. It does not mean 
              that the item in question is exactly the same, or a perfect duplicate of the original.

    III.   Institute in Basic Youth Conflicts, by Bill Gothard; 1969 edition.
        The following description of  forgiveness and forgiving is given in the introduction   
        section entitled; "What It Really Means to Forgive", in the notebook for the Basic 
        Youth Conflicts Seminars. This definition (or description) is a more practical  
        approach to the subject of "forgiveness".
             "Forgiveness deals with our emotional response toward an offender. 
          Pardon deals with the consequences of his offence. Unless we have the
          authority we may not be able to pardon an offence, but we can always 
          forgive.
              Forgiving a person is 'clearing his record' with us and transferring the
          responsibility for any punishment to God. Forgiveness will make it possible
          for us to have the same openness toward him after he offends us as we had
          before he offended us."


              
God's Forgiveness for Mankind:

     I. Identifying the offense
        A. original sin. (Gen.3)
             1. act of disobedience toward God's command.
        B. continued sin due to sin nature within us. (Gen.8:21; Rom.1:21-32)
             1. continued disobedience toward God's commands.
             2. acts of sin toward other people
     II. Identifying of Consequences of offense.
        A. immediate separation from fellowship with God (first spiritual death)
             Gen.3:9-19, 22-24
        B. Physical death (second form of  death)
             Gen. 5:5; Eccl.. 3: 1-2; I Cor.15:54-56
        C. eternal (or everlasting) death.(second form of spiritual death).
             John 3:16; Rom 6:23; Rev. 20:6
        (For a more indepth description of these three areas of death see: Genesis In Space 
        and Time; by Francis A. Schaeffer; Inter Varsity Press, Downers Grove, Ill.;1972)
     III.  Identifying the means by which the situation can be corrected.
         A. God's plan of salvation through Christ. (sacrifice for our sins)
              John 3:16; Rom 6:23; etc.
         B. Man's acceptance of God's plan of salvation. Forgiven and Reconciled!
              John 3; Eph. 2:8-9; etc.
         C. Continued forgiveness for sin after acceptance of salvation.
              I John 1:9
      IV. Identifying results of not accepting 
         In this case, rejecting God's plan of salvation results in a second spiritual death
         as mentioned in II.C. above (Rev.20:6; etc.)        



Our Forgiveness toward others:

     I. Identifying the offense
        A. separating the "offender" from the "offense".
             1. the offender can be:
                 a. Christian; in which case we are commanded by Christ to maintain good             
                     relations with our brothers and sisters in Christ. Forgiveness is a big part of   
                     maintaining proper relationships in the household of God.(Matt. 18:15; Luke 
                     17; 3-4; Eph. 4:25-32; Col. 3:12-14)
                 b. a non-Christian; our attitude toward non believers who offend us: 
                     (Matt. 5:43-48; Rom. 12:9-21; I Peter 3:8-17) Even though these verses do
                     not specifically mention that we are to "forgive" non believers for their          
                     offenses toward us, the attitudes described strongly indicate that this is 
                     exactly what we are to do in order to be a "Christ like" example to them.
             2. the offense:
                  a. the "offender" is not the "offense"! 
                         Far too often we lump both the offense and the offender into the same 
                      "ball of wax" and proceed to commit "character assassination" on that 
                      person. Name calling is usually the first step that indicates this problem.
                      (jerk, bone head, scuzz bucket, and many others that we will not list). If this  
                      attitude persists, it becomes much more difficult for the person who was 
                      offended to extend forgiveness toward the offender. 
                        1.) the offender is a person
                        2.) the offense is an improper action or attitude. 
                   b. "offenses" can be done: deliberately, accidently, unknowingly, etc.
                   c. "offenses " can be caused by: "assuming" something as being true without 
                        valid information, "miscommunications" of important information, "not  
                        listening" to the point of understanding, being "insensitive" to the needs or 
                        vulnerability of others, "pride", being out of fellowship with Christ, uncon-     
                        fessed sin in a persons life, etc..
                    d. a person can be "offended" by any of the above as well as: "looking for a 
                        reason to be offended".
       
       B. Recognizing an "offense" as:
            1. an "opportunity" to be an "example of the believer" by having a Christ like 
                response to the situation.
                   This in not easy! We have been conditioned by so many sources, to respond 
                 to offenses in a negative way, that it is almost unthinkable to react in any other 
                 way. However, as mentioned in the verses in "A" above, we are to respond as
                 an "example of the believer"
             2. an "opportunity" to understand the "offenders" needs, and help them grow 
                 closer to Christ  through proper Christian love.


   
II. Identifying the consequences of  an "offense":
       A. fellowship is broken
            1. with God (when sin is involved, or when we fail to correct the problem with 
                some one we have offended.)
            2. with person or persons offended. 
       B. emotional problems
            1. guilt - about offending another person
            2. fear - not wanting to face some one you have offended.
            3. lying to yourself - not wanting to admit that you have offended some one. 
            4. pride - not wanting to admit that you have offended some one.
            5. lack of love - toward offender.
            6. holding a "grudge" - toward offender.
            7. depression - because of unresolved conflict
            8. fatigue - because of depression and the energy it takes to maintain an unresolved 
                             conflict.
            9. resentment - toward offender
            10. bitterness - toward offender
           * The problems created by an unresolved "offense", (the offender or the offended),
           causes an improper "emotional focus" toward the other person involved. It also 
           causes us to take our eyes off of Christ and His Love that we are to have for   
           everyone.   
       C. spiritual problems
            1. All of the above emotional problems are actually signs of a "possible" spiritual   
           problem of not forgiving a person for an offense, or knowing you have offended a 
           person and refusing to ask "to be forgiven" for your offense toward them.
            2. Hinders the work of the Holy Spirit - due to unresolved sin.
            3. Gives Satan a point of "accusation".
            4. Can lead to feeling "inadequate" and refuse opportunities for serving Christ.
            5. Questioning your own salvation.
            6. Lack of devotional and prayer time- due to guilt or bitterness.
            7. Refusing fellowship with other believers.
            8. Redefining or interpreting Scripture to justify improper actions or attitudes.
            9.etc.

III. Identifying the means by which the situation can be corrected.
      (as the offender)
     A. ask for "forgiveness" from God (I John 1:9)
          1.be specific - actions, attitude, anger, whatever  it is He Does Understand and Will 
                                Forgive.
          2.pray for the other person - that they might forgive you and fellowship can be 
                                restored.         
          3.pray for yourself - that you will go to the person you have offended in "humility" 
                                and "agape love", so both of you can have restored fellowship with 
                                Christ and each other.         

                                         
    
     B. GO to the person offended and ask them to Forgive You 
          1. Go alone - asking for forgiveness is NOT a group activity. (If the problem is 
                               between a man and a woman it is advisable to suggest a "neutral" 
                               meeting place.)
          2. confess Your offense - improper actions, attitudes, etc.
          3. ask SPECIFICALLY - "Will you please forgive me for ........................, my 
                               (attitude or actions) were not what I know God would want me to 
                               have. Will you please forgive me?"
          4. use some "wisdom" - it is not usually "smart", nor does it show much "humility" 
                               to try to explain to the person you are asking forgiveness from that 
                               in some way THEY were partly the cause of your misconduct. Even
                               if this is true, save it for another time. Also, keep in mind that when 
                               you approach some one and ask them to forgive you, they may in turn 
                               wish to be forgiven by you as well.
          5. pray with them - help heal their wounds and yours by lifting each other to God 
                               and Christ through prayer and agape love.

     (as the "offended" person)
    A. pray - ask God to help you approach the "offender" in a true attitude of  agape love
                               as well as "humility". Pray that the Holy Spirit will give you the proper 
                               words to use so you can:
                               1.express the offense accurately, but without attacking the"character"
                                  of the person.
                               2.show that you truly value the person you will face.
    B. Go alone - this too is NOT a group activity! (see 1. under B. of the previous section)
    C. PRAY with the person first.- ask for guidance and understanding between you both.
                                DO NOT use this prayer as an opportunity to explain the persons 
                                offense while praying!
    D. explain or describe the offense - be GENTLE, be accurate, be loving, be under-
                                standing.
    E. LISTEN to them - Many times you will find that what you thought was a major
                                offense, is nothing more then a minor communications foul up.
                                In a lot of cases you will find that the person who committed the
                                offense was not aware that they had done it and are more then 
                                willing to get it corrected. Also, through listening, you may find 
                                that the offender is struggling with problems that contributed to
                                his or her misconduct. Once you know about them you can help
                                them by being understanding and supportive.
    F. If they refuse to listen - Forgive them in YOUR heart. You have done what the 
                                Scriptures require. The problem becomes one that is between
                                them and God. Pray for that person, forgive them, love them.
                                God will deal with them in His time.
