
Hebrews Chapter 1

     Read the first chapter of Hebrews,(provided below in the New American Standard Version) and determine the following: 1) To whom are the pronouns (i.e. I, He, Him, Thine, etc.) referring ? Which ones refer to God the Father? Which ones refer to Christ?  2) What does this chapter tell us about who God the Father is and what are some of His "characteristics" as God? 3) What does this chapter tell us about who Christ is and what are some of His "characteristics" as Christ?

-Hebrews Chapter 1-

    God, after He spoke long ago to the fathers in the prophets in many portions and in many ways,  in these last days has spoken to us in His Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whom also He made the world.  And He is the radiance of His glory and the exact representation of His nature, and upholds all things by the word of His power.  When He had made purification of sins, He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high; having become as much better than the angels, as He has inherited a more excellent name than they.  For to which of the angels did He ever say,
     "Thou art My Son, Today I have begotten Thee"?
And again,
     "I will be a Father to Him, And He shall be a Son to Me"?
(6) And when He again brings the firstborn into the world, He says,
     "And let all the angels of God worship Him."
And of the angels He says,
     "Who makes His angels winds, And His ministers a flame of fire."
(8) But of the Son He says,
     "Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever,
     And the righteous scepter is the secpter of His kingdom.
     Thou hast loved righteousness and hated lawlessness;
     Therefore God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee 
     With the oil of gladness above Thy Companions."
(10) And,
     "Thou, Lord, in the beginning didst lay the foundation of the Earth,
     And the heavens are the works of Thy hands;They will perish, but Thou remainest;
     And they all will become old as a garment,And as a mantle Thou wilt roll them up;
     As a garment they will also be changed.But Thou art the same,
     And Thy years will not come to an end."
(13) But to which of  the angels has He ever said,
     "Sit at My right hand, Until I make Thine enemies a footstool for Thy feet."?
(14) Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out to render service for the sake of those who will inherit salvation?


 Hebrews Chapter 2 

     Read the second chapter of Hebrews,(provided below in the New American Standard Version) and determine the following: 1) What is the "reason" given in chapter one, that should cause us to "...pay much closer attention to what we have heard,..."? 2) What is the "reason" given in the first few verses of chapter two that should cause us to "...pay much closer attention to what we have heard,..."? 
3) According to this chapter, creation was made "subject" to whom? But is now "subject" to some one else. Why? 4) What are some of the reasons given for Christ's "sufferings", and the importance of Him becoming "flesh"?

- Hebrews Chapter 2 -

     For this reason we must pay much closer attention to what we have heard, lest we drift away from it. For if the word spoken through angels proved unalterable, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense, how should we escape if we neglect so great a salvation? After it was at the first spoken through the Lord, it was confirmed to us by those who heard. God also bearing witness with them, both by signs and wonders and by various miracles and by gifts of the Holy Spirit according to His own will.
  5) For He did not subject to angels the world to come, concerning which we are speaking. But one has testified somewhere, saying,
       "What is man, that Thou rememberest him? Or the son of man, that Thou art 
     concerned about him?
  7) "Thou hast made him for a little while lower than the angels; Thou hast crowned  
     him with glory and honor, and hast appointed him over the works of Thy hands;
     Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet."
For in subjecting all things to him, He left nothing that is not subject to him. But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him. But we do see Him who has been made for a little while lower than the angels, namely, Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God He might taste death for every one. 10) For it was fitting for Him, for whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to perfect the author of their salvation through sufferings. For both He who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one Father; for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brethren, saying,
       "I will proclaim Thy name to My brethren, In the midst of the congregation I 
     will sing Thy praise."
 13) And again,
       "I will put My trust in Him."
       And again,
       "Behold, I and the children whom God has given Me."



Hebrews chapt. 2 (cont.)

14) Since then the children share in flesh and blood, He Himself likewise also partook of the same, that through death He might render powerless him who had the power of death, that is, the devil; and might deliver those who through fear of death were subject to slavery all their lives. 16) For assuredly He does not give help to angels, but He gives help to the descendant of Abraham. Therefore, He had to be made like His brethren in all things, that He might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the things pertaining to God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people. For since He Himself was tempted in that which He has suffered, He is able to come to the aid of those who are tempted.

          

































Hebrews Chapters 3 and 4

     These two chapters need to be studied as a unit in order to maintain the flow of  what the author is trying to teach. There are numerous doctrinal concepts in these two chapters that need to be examined, such as: 1) The "house" to which Moses was faithful. The "house" of Christ,  2) The "hardening" of the heart. 3) Man's "rest" as opposed to God's "rest". 4) Having an "unbelieving heart" 5) "Today" 
6) "disobedience" toward God. 7) Being "diligent" to enter "God's" rest. 8) The power of God's word. 9) Christ as our high priest. 
     Read both of these chapters as one "unit" and note the subjects listed above as well as any others you might come across. You should also go back into chapter two in order to be sure of the "flow" of what the author presenting.

- Hebrews Chapter 3 -

     Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider Jesus, the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. He was faithful to Him who appointed Him, as Moses also was in all His house. For He has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, by just so much as the builder of the house has more honor than the house. 4) For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God. Now Moses was faithful in all His house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken later; but Christ was faithful as a Son over His house whose house we are, if we hold fast our confidence and the boast of our hope firm until the end. Therefore, just as the Holy Spirit says,
     "Today if you hear His voice, Do not harden you heart as when 
  they provoked Me,
     As in the day of trail in the wilderness, where your fathers tried Me by 
  testing Me, and saw My works for forty years.
10) "Therefore I was angry with this generation, And said, 'They always go astray
  in their heart; And they did not know My ways';
11) As I swore in My wrath, 'They shall not enter My rest."
12) Take care, brethren, lest there should be in any one of you an evil, unbelieving heart, in fallinf away from the living God. But encourage one another day after day, as long as it is still called "Today," lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. 14) For we have become partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the beginning of our assurance firm until the end; while it is said,
     "Today, if you hear His voice, Do not harden your hearts, as when they 
     provoked Me."
16) For who provoked Him when they had heard? Indeed, did not all those who came out of Egypt led by Moses? And with whom was He angry for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness?
17) And to whom did He swear that they should not enter His rest, but to those who were disobedient? And so we see that they were not able to enter because of unbelief.



-  Hebrews Chapter 4  -


     Therefore, let us fear lest, while a promise remains of entering His rest, any one of you should seem to have come short of it. For indeed we have had good news preached to us, just as they also; but the word they heard did not profit them, because it was not united by faith in those who heard. For we who have believed enter that rest; just as He has said,
     "As I swore in My wrath, They shall not enter My rest,"
although His works were finished from the foundation of the world. 4) For He has thus said somewhere concerning the seventh day, "And God rested on the seventh day from all His works"; and again in this passage, "They shall not enter My rest."
6) Since therefore it remains for some to enter it, and those who formerly had good news preached to them failed to enter because of disobedience, He again fixes a certain day, "Today," saying through David after so long a time just as has been said before.
      "Today if you hear His voice, Do not harden your hearts."
8) For if Joshua had given them rest, He would not have spoken of another day after that. There remains therefore a Sabbath rest for the people of God. 10) For the one who has entered His rest has himself also rested from his works, as God did from His. Let us therefore be diligent to enter that rest, lest anyone fall through following the same example of disobedience. 12) For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing as far as division of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart. And there is no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are open and laid bare to the eyes of Him with whom we have to do. 
14) Since then we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession. For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who has been tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin. 16) Let us therefore draw near with confidence to the throne of grace, that we may recieve mercy and may find grace to help in time of need.














Hebrews Chapter 5

     Before studying chapter five of Hebrews, we should go back through chapters one through  four and take note of the many "comparisons"  that the writer has been making. Such as: God the Father to Christ, Christ to Angels, Angels to man, Christ to Adam, Christ becoming man, Christ as a servant to Moses as a servant, etc.. It would seem reasonable to say that the writer of Hebrews has chosen this particular format in order to persuade the recipients of this letter (primarily Jews) of the authenticity of Christ as the one who fulfills the requirements of  Old Testament doctrine.
     This pattern of "comparisons" continues throughout the book of Hebrews and should be kept in mind at all times. Also, Jewish religious laws and traditions  should be kept in mind, in order to avoid errors in interpretation caused by superimposing our modern day concepts into these passages of scripture. 
     In chapter five, see what "comparisons" you can find. What are some of the characteristics of a priest? How does this compare to Christ? What does Aaron have to do with all this? Who is this Melchizedek? (Look ahead at chapt. 7 for a "sneak preview") What does it mean to become "dull of hearing"?

- Hebrews Chapter 5 -
     For every high priest taken from among men is appointed on behalf of men in things pertaining to God in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins; he can deal gently with the ignorant and misguided, since he himself also is beset with weakness; and because of it he is obligated to offer sacrifices for sins, as for the people, so also for himself. And no one takes the honor to himself, but receives it when he is called by God, even as Aaron was. So also Christ did not glorify Himself so as to become a high priest, but He who said to Him,
           "Thou art My Son, Today I have begotten Thee";
just as He says also in another passage,
           "Thou art a priest forever According to the order of Melchizedek."
(7) In the days of  His flesh, He offered up both prayers and supplications with loud crying and tears to the One able to save Him from death, and He was heard because of His piety. Although He was a Son, He learned obedience from the things which He suffered. (9) And having been made perfect, He became to all those who obey Him the source of eternal salvation; being designated by God as a high priest according to the order of  Melchizedek.
      (11) Concerning him we have much more to say, and it is hard to explain, since you have become dull of hearing. For though by this time you ought to be teachers, you have need again for some one to teach you the elementary principles of the oracles of God, and you have come to need milk and not solid food. (13) For every one who partakes only of milk is not accustomed to the word of righteousness, for he is a babe. But solid food is for the mature, who because of practice have their senses trained to descern good and evil.


Hebrews Chapter 6

     In chapter five, the writer of  Hebrews slipped in a comparison of Christ with Melchizedek that will not be explained until he gets to chapter seven. The same technique is being used here in chapter six concerning "...falling away...", and "...renew again to repentance...". To avoid confusion it is important to read chapters 9 and 10 along with chapter 6. Be sure to look specifically at chapter 9:23-28 and chapter 10: 16-26.
     Is God forgetful, in what we do to minister to "the saints"? Have you ever felt like God doesn't care, or that you are the "only one" who does care? What was the promise that God made to Abraham? (see Gen.15:1-21; 17:1-27)

- Hebrews Chapter 6 -

     Therefore leaving the elementary teaching about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God, of instruction about washings, and laying on of hands, and resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgement. (3) And this we shall do, if God permits. For in the case of those who have once been enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift and have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come and then have fallen away, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance, since they crucify to themselves the Son of God, and put Him to an open shame. (7) For ground that drinks the rain which often falls upon it and brings forth vegetation useful to those for whose sake it is also tilled, receives a blessing from God; but if it yields thorns and thistles, it is worthless and close to being cursed, and it ends up being burned.
    (9) But, beloved, we are convinced of better things concerning you, and things that accompany salvation, though we are speaking in this way. For God is not unjust so as to forget your work and the love which you have shown toward His name, in having ministered and in still ministering to the saints. And we desire that each of you show the same diligence so as to realize the full assurance of hope until the end, (12) that you may not be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
   (13) For when God made the promise to Abraham, since He could  swear by no one greater, He swore by Himself, saying, "I will surely bless you, and I will surely multiply you." (15) And thus, having patiently waited, he obtained the promise. For men swear by one greater than themselves, and with them an oath given as confirmation is an end of every dispute. In the same way God, desiring even more to show to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of His purpose, interposed with an oath, (18) in order that by two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement, we who have fled for refuge in laying hold of the hope set before us. This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, a hope both sure and stedfast and one which enters within the veil, (20) where Jesus has entered as a forerunner for us, having become a high priest forever according to the order of Melchizdek.

Hebrews Chapter 7

     A great deal of confusion comes about when we start talking about Melchizedek and the relationship between him and Christ. This is further complicated by the relationship of the two as "High Priest". Also, the fact that neither are of the tribe of Levi, (i.e. the tribe through which priests were to be chosen), makes the understanding of this passage even more difficult.
     However, there is hope! If we continue to remember that the writer of Hebrews is constantly using "comparisons" from  Jewish history, as well as social and religious examples that would be well known to the reader, we will begin to understand the importance of this passage.
     One final note! Don't get "hung up" on trying to figure out too much about who and what Melchizedek is, and where he came from. The major issue of this chapter is the Priesthood of Christ. Not "Mel" what's his name. 

- Hebrews Chapter 7 -

     For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham as he was returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him, to whom also Abraham apportioned a tenth part of all the spoils, was first of all, by the translation of his name, king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is king of peace. Without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the Son of God, he abides a priest perpetually. (4) Now observe how great this man was to whom Abraham, the patriarch, gave a tenth of the choicest spoils. And those indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the priest's office have commandment in the Law to collect a tenth from the people, that is, from their brethren, although these are descended from Abraham.(6) But the one whose genealogy is not traced from them collected a tenth from Abraham, and blessed the one who had the promises. But without any dispute the lesser is blessed by the greater. And in this case mortal men receive tithes, but in that case one receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives on. And, so to speak, through Abraham even Levi, who received tithes, paid tithes, for he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him.
     (11) Now if perfection was through the Levitical priesthood (for on the basis of it people received the Law), what further need was there for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek, and not be designated according to the order of Aaron? For when the priesthood was changed, of necessity there takes place a change of  law also. (13) For the one concerning whom these things are spoken belongs to another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the alter. For it is evident that our Lord was descended from Judah, a tribe with reference to which Moses spoke nothing concerning priests. (15) And this is clearer still, if another priest arises according to the likeness of Melchizedek, who has become such not on the basis of a law of physical requirement, but according to the power of an indestructible life.    


   (17) For it is witnessed of Him,
          "Thou art a priest forever
          According to the order of Melchizedek."
   (18) For, on the one hand, there is a setting aside of a former commandment because of its weakness and uselessness (for the Law made nothing perfect), and on the other hand there is a bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw near to God. (20) And inasmuch as it was not without an oath (for they indeed became priests without an oath, but he with an oath through the one who said to Him,
            "The Lord has sworn
            And will not change His mind,
            'Thou art a priest forever'");
(22) so much the more also Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant. And the former priests, on the one hand, existed in greater numbers, because they were prevented by death from continuing, but He, on the other hand, because He abides forever, holds His priesthood permanently. Hence also He is able to save forever those who draw near to God through Him, since He always lives to make intercession for them.
     (26) For it was fitting that we should have such a high priest, holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners and exalted above the heavens; who does not need daily , like those high priests, to offer up sacrifices, first for His own sins, and then for the sins of the people, because this He did once for all when He offered up Himself. (28) For the Law appoints men as high priests who are weak, but the word of the oath, which came after the Law, appoints a Son, made perfect forever.           






















Hebrews Chapter 8

     This chapter is a summary, or restatement of the main points found in chapter 7. The writer emphasizes Christ's priesthood as being of more value then that of earthly priests, the "heavenly" sanctuary as opposed to an earthly one, better gifts, new covenant, Christ as mediator and the change from an "outward worship" of sacrifices and laws, to having God's laws "...into their minds, and...upon their hearts...." .
     Questions: 1) What is the "main point" as described in verses 1&2?
                      2) Why did the first covenant become "obsolete"? Why wasn't the   
                           first covenant "faultless"?
                      3) List the promises God gives to Israel (and to us) found in verses
                          10-12 of this chapter.
                      4) Verse 12 is rather special. Try to explain this verse in your own 
                           words and then meditate on what this verse should mean to you
                           personally. What do you see in this verse about God's love for us 
                           and how He, now, sees or sin? How does this draw you closer  
                           to Him?

- Hebrews Chapter 8 - 

     Now the main point in what has been said is this: we have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, a minister in the sanctuary, and in the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, not man. For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices; hence it is necessary that this high priest also have something to offer. (4) Now if He were on earth, He would not be a priest at all, since there are those who offer the gifts according to the Law; who serve a copy and a shadow of the heavenly things, just as Moses is warned by God when he was about to erect the tabernacle; for, "See," He says, "That you make all things according to the pattern which was shown you on the mountain." (6) But now He has obtained a more excellent ministry, by as much as He is also the mediator of a better covenant, which has been enacted on better promises. For if that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been no occasion sought for a second. (8) For finding fault with them, He says,
          "Behold, days are coming, says the Lord, when I will effect a new covenant
          with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah;
          Not like the covenant which I made with their fathers on day when I took 
          them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt;
          For they did not continue in my covenant, and I did not care for them, says 
          the Lord.
         






(Chapter 8 continued)

          (10) "For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
          after those days, says the Lord:
          I will put my laws into their minds, and I will write them upon their hearts.
          And I will be their God, and they shall be My people.
          (11) "And they shall Not teach every one his fellow-citizen, and every one
          his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord.' For all shall know Me, from the least 
          to the greatest of them.(12) For I will be merciful to their iniquities, and I will
          remember their sins no more."
          (13) When He said, "A new covenant," He has made the first obsolete. But  
          whatever is becoming obsolete and growing old is ready to disappear.
































Hebrews Chapter 9

     In this chapter the writer shows how the "earthly tabernacle", (i.e. rituals of the Jewish  temple worship), was not able to make a worshiper perfect in "conscience",
and that this "first covenant" was replaced by the "new covenant" when Christ shed His blood for our sins. It also shows the necessity of the shedding of Christ's blood as the accepted sacrifice by which God would forgive man's sin.
     What are the major differences between what was accomplished by earthly priests who offered sacrifices at the temple, and Christ's offering as our high priest?

- Hebrews Chapter 9 -
     
     Now even the first covenant had regulations of divine worship and the earthly sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle prepared, the outer one, in which were the lampstand and the table and the sacred bread; this is called the holy place. And behind the second veil, there was a tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies, having a golden alter of incense and the ark of the covenant covered on all sides with gold, in which was a golden jar holding the manna, and Aaron's rod which budded, and the table of the covenant. (5) And above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercyseat; but of these things we cannot now speak in detail. Now when these things have been thus prepared, the priests are continually entering the outer tabernacle, performing the divine worship, but into the second only the high priest enters, once a year, not without taking blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins of the people committed in ignorance. (8) The Holy Spirit is signifying this, that the way into the holy place has not yet been disclosed, while the outer tabernacle is still standing; which is a symbol for the present time. Accordingly both gifts and sacrifices are offered which cannot make the worshiper perfect in conscience,(10) since they relate only to food and drink and various washings, regulations for the body imposed until a time of reformation.
     (11) But when Christ appeared as a high priest of the good things to come, He appeared through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation; and not through the blood of  goats and calves, but through His own blood He entered the holy place once for all, having obtained eternal redemption. (13) For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled, sanctify for the cleansing of the flesh, how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself  without blemish to God, cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? (15) And for this reason He is the mediator of a new covenant, in order that since a death has taken place for the redemption of the transgressions that were committed under the first covenant, those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. (16) For where a covenant is, there must of necessity be the death of the one who made it. For a covenant is valid only when men are dead, for it is never in force while the one who made it lives.


(chapter 9 - continued)

(18) Therefore even the first covenant was not inaugurated without blood. For when every commandment had been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the Law, he took the blood of the calves and the goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, saying, "This is the blood of the covenant which God command you." (21) And in the same way he sprinkled both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry with blood. And according to the Law, one may almost say, all things are cleansed with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.
     (23) Therefore it was necessary for the copies of the things in the heavens to be cleansed with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ did not enter a holy place made with hands, a mere copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us; (25) nor was it that He should offer Himself often, as the high priest enters the holy place year by year with blood not his own. Otherwise, He would have needed to suffer often since the foundation of the world; but now once at the consummation of the ages He has been manifested to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.(27) And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once, and after this comes judgment, so Christ, also, having been 0ffered once to bear the sins of many, shall appear a second time for salvation without reference to sin, to those who eagerly await Him.




