- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley
       (Feb. 2006)
- Looking at Creation -
(from Gods' side of the fence)
     In our present cultural environment with its, 'do everything you can as fast as you can' mentality, it is becoming quite common for people to become "sloppy" in their methods of Bible study. Unfortunately, many Christians, Sunday School teachers and even pastors are guilty of this improper type of studying. If we truly value God's word we should always take the time to study it correctly, and as II Timothy 2:14-15 reminds us:
               "Remind them of these things,(see verses 1-13 for context) and 
               solemnly charge them in the presence of God not to wrangle about
               words, which is useless, and leads to the ruin of the hearers. Be
               diligent to present yourself approved to God as a workman who
               does not need to be ashamed, handling accurately the word of
               truth."
     In the process of studying Scripture, it is important to make sure that a number of things are observed in order to; "...handle accurately the word of truth.", which includes such things as, context, content, who the author is, time it was written, don't superimpose our western culture or 20th century concepts into Scripture and a few more. But the one that is left out of our Bible studies more than any other seems to be the 'Character of God'. When I realized this, I began trying to understand Gods' Word from His perspective. Or, 'hop the fence',... so to speak, in a spiritual way.
     When I started to look at Scripture more from Gods' side of the fence, I was immediately confronted with two spiritual truths. 1) Gods' character is too large (try infinite) for us to consider without asking Him for His help in understanding His Word. In other words, prayer is a must! 2) If you really want to see things from His viewpoint, be ready to re-evaluate your current beliefs and concepts of Scripture. Some of them will change! Also, if you ask Him, He will answer.
     Having been involved in teaching Bible studies off and on for about thirty years, I have been aware that it is one thing to 'teach' something and quite another to put it into practise. This being the case, I am going to invite you to come with me for a 'condensed' Bible study of  'Creation and the Flood' that our family (my wife and son) did during the last half of 2003. In this presentation I am only going to address four areas; 1) the first day of creation, 2) the Fall of Man, 3) the Flood, and 4) legitimate archeological information that properly supports one or more of these areas. We will also do our best to 'hop the fence' and consider what we find in light of Gods' character.(Look for the places where what God 'did' is emphasized, or the letters, h.t.f. for, 'hop the fence') 
     To begin with, we want to make sure that those who might read this study will understand that we are conducting a Bible study and not and argument of creation vs. evolution, but it will be an in depth study of the Biblical accuracy and 'truths' of Gods' Word, in relation to the above mentioned areas. In order to do this we designed the following statement of  our basic presuppositions as guidelines for this study. They are:
- Before examining this work, please be advised that it is being 
done with the following presuppositions as guide lines.-
1) God is real and His Word is true.
2  To study Gods' Word properly by; Having the correct context and content; A proper understanding of 
    the culture and writing methods used; Not superimposing our culture into Scripture; And most of all, 
    keeping Gods' over all character in tact so that we match His character and not our own whims.
3) After the above has been done honestly and in Spirit and in Truth, outside sources may be used to 
    support or verify Scriptural content. These sources will be used properly and without distortion.
     - Let the Study Begin! - 

(2)

- Creation: Day One -

     Genesis 1:1-5; "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The earth was without form, and void; and darkness was on the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters. Then God said, "Let there be light"; and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good; and God divided the light from the darkness. God called the light Day, and the darkness He called Night. So the evening and the morning  were the first day." (NKJV)

      In the verses above we have the creation of 'time'. But look close, the light mentioned is not referring to the sun, moon and stars. On the first day of creation God created 'light' itself. Light had never existed until God made it, and the 'light and darkness' became the 'clock' that God started. Because this is His 'clock', when He says; "...and the evening and the morning were the first day." then that's what it is. More to the point, the Hebrew language leaves no room here for altering the content or context of this text in order to support other persuasions that are contrary to this passage of Scripture. The rest of God's 'time piece', (the sun, moon and stars) were created on the fourth day. They were created so that man would be able to tell; "...signs and seasons, and for days and years..." (see Gen.1:14-19)      
    (htf) Realizing that God was responsible for creating 'time', through the separating of the light from the darkness, was one of those things I had missed in previous readings of Genesis. Try to comprehend what it would be like without 'time'. I can't even get started, it boggles my mind. Yet, we have a God who was (and is) capable of 'speaking' time into existence. One other 'piece' of creation in this passage that I had missed is that God, most likely, created the 'spectrums' of light during this separation of light from darkness. It is well known that we can only see a small portion of the light that exists. There are areas of 'light' at each end of the spectrum that we cannot see. (we'll come back here later when we h.t.f.)

- The Fall of Man -

     On the sixth day, God creates all the cattle, creeping things and the beasts of the earth, with His final creation being man. Gen. 1:26; "Then God said, 'Let us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness,...'" Man was made in Gods' image. God puts man (Adam) into the garden of Eden, tells him that he can eat of all the fruits of the garden except for one, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. God issues this warning; 
                Gen.2:17; "...but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat,
 for in the day that you eat of it you will surely die." (NKJV)
One translation of  the last part of this verse says; "...,dying you shall die.". 
    Creation is finished, Adam and Eve are in the Garden of Eden, God declares the seventh day as a day of rest, and He rested. 
     The next event 'recorded' in Biblical History is the Fall of Man. The woman, being talked into eating the forbidden fruit by what is called a 'serpent', then gives some of the fruit to her husband. They suddenly realize they are stark naked, and soon after the Lord God comes to the garden for a visit. This is definitely not good timing!
     At times I have felt that the above paragraph is the 'sum total' of what most people know about the Fall of Man; Christians included. What is transpiring between, a 'serpent' and the woman, is not just a case of  'petty fruit stealing' !

     

(3)
Genesis 3:1-7; "Now the serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field which the Lord God made. And he said to the woman, (1)'Has God indeed said, (2)'You shall not eat of every tree of the garden?' And the woman said to the serpent, 'We may eat the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said, 'You shall not eat it, nor shall you touch it, lest you die.' (3) Then the serpent said to the woman, 'You will not surely die. (4) For God knows that in the day you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, (5) knowing good and evil.' So when the woman (6) saw that the tree was good for food, (7) that it was pleasant to the eyes, (8) and a tree desirable to make one wise, (9) she took of its fruit and ate. (10) She also gave to her husband with her, (11)and he ate. (12) Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves coverings." (NKJV)

     (htf) There are no less than 12 things that happen in this short encounter between the 'serpent' and the woman. (match the numbers  in the passage with the ones below.)
(1) This is a questioning, or doubting of Gods' word, and an attack on His authority.
(2) A deliberate misquote of what God had said, which questions the accuracy of Gods word.
(3) The serpent is calling God a liar. (This was even hard for me to write down. The blasphemy of the 
      serpents statement is nauseating)
(4) Suggests that God is hiding something good from the woman.
(5)This statement may actually be true. But it is also misleading! 
      Gen. 3:22 "Then the Lord God said, ' Behold, the man has  become like one of  Us, to know good   
      and evil. And now, lest he put out his hand and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever."  
      The real problem however, is that man was never supposed to have the knowledge of good and evil, 
      because he did not have the ability to use it correctly. Gen.6:3; "And the Lord said, ' My Spirit shall 
      not strive with man forever, for he is indeed flesh; yet his days shall be one hundred and twenty 
      years.' (NKJV) The Interlinear Hebrew - English  Bible (by Jay Green) reads; "And Jehovah said, My 
      spirit shall not always strive with man; in his erring they are flesh; ..." Gen. 6:5 says; " Then the Lord 
      saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every intent of the thoughts of his 
      heart was only to do evil continually."
(6, 7, 8, 9) All of these are related to our human desires. '...good for food., ...pleasant to the eyes, ...make 
      one wise, ...took ...and ate.' The lethal blow here is when the woman lost sight of Gods' command 
      and acted according to the 'human' desires manipulated by the serpents attack on Gods' character. 
      How and why this trickery was able to succeed is beyond me. It is not something I can comprehend.
(10,11) There will always be a question in my mind concerning the womans' knowledge of what she had 
      done before giving the fruit to her husband and did Adam know where the fruit had come from before 
      he took a bite. But in all fairness, (and to keep the ladies who read this from calling me bias) I believe 
      that # (12) may give me a way of getting my foot out of my mouth.
(12) According to this part of the passage, they did not know what they had done until both of them had 
      eaten of the fruit.  Then their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked.
     
Adam and the woman made a fatal mistake by disobeying Gods' command to not eat of the 'tree of the knowledge of good and evil. However, it is important here to understand that the actions of the serpent  were an attack aimed at Gods authority and character. Because of the nature of the questions, I believe it would be correct to say that this attack by Satan and the serpent was really aimed at God. The woman and Adam were the 'means' they used to make their attack on Gods' authority and character.
    


(4)
Here's a little 'tidbit' from one of the far corners of my warped little mind!. You've probably noticed that I have been using the word 'woman', all through this last section of this study. The reason is that up to the time of the fall, Adam had not 'named' his wife. Gen.3:20; "And Adam called his wife's name Eve, (or life) because she was the mother of all living." This is the first mention of 'the woman' being given a name
     With the exception of the curse on the 'serpent', which may have been a 'dragon like' animal, the fall of Adam and Eve ushered in curses and changes in creation  that are still in effect today. The curse on the woman; Gen. 3:16 "...'I will greatly multiply your sorrow and your conception; In pain you shall bring forth children; Your desire shall be for your husband, And he shall rule over you." Then to Adam He said, 

Genesis 3:17-19; "...'because you have heeded the voice of your wife, 
and have eaten from the tree of which I commanded you, saying, 'You shall not eat of it':
'Cursed is the ground for your sake; 
In toil you shall eat of it all the days of your life. 
Both thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you,
 and you shall eat of the herb of the field.
 In the sweat of your face you shall eat bread
 till you return to the ground, 
For out of it you were taken; 
For dust you are, and to dust you shall return."

     Along with the above curses, the fall brought 'sin' and 'death' into Gods creation. Because of this, God sent His Son, Jesus Christ to save us all from our sins and the effects of the original sin.
     In studying the Fall, we were left with some questions concerning how much time elapsed between creation and the fall of man. According to the Biblical record in Genesis chapters 3 to 5 there is no statement that would indicate that any amount of time had elapsed between the two. It is difficult to believe that Gods' creation could (or would) be destroyed so soon after being created. 
     To further complicate the issue, in 1650 A.D. James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, Ireland, calculated the total number of years people lived, recorded in Genesis (which start after the fall) and came up with 4004 years. Usher, believed that this number was an accurate number of years between the year '0' B.C. and creation.  At the time Usher worked out this date there was no reason to call it into question. As a matter of fact, what he found was fantastic considering the time period in which he made this observation.
     Finally, to add more fuel to the fire, in Gen. 4:1-2; Eve had conceived and bore Cain and Able sometime after the fall, but there is no time given in order to know how long it was after the fall that she gave birth. Also, Adam's genealogical record starts with the birth of his son Seth at 130 years after the fall. (see Gen. 5:3&4). The number of questions surpassed answers at this juncture. There was something else we didn't know, ...God was waiting for us 'around the corner' with a pile of answers.
(5)
- The Flood of Noah -
(and some serious H.T.F.)

     At the beginning of this study we only examined the first day of creation. In our original study in 2003 we examined each day of the creation process as carefully as we could and learned that the original earth had been designed something like a giant terrarium or biosphere. (There is no one word to properly describe the earth at that time. Examine chapter one of Genesis for details) We also found that God used His wisdom in creating the heavens and the earth. Speaking about wisdom;     
  
 Proverbs 8:22-31; 
"The Lord possessed me at the beginning of His way, before His works of old.
I have been established from everlasting, From the beginning, before there was ever an earth.
When there were no depths I was brought forth, When there were no fountains abounding with water.
Before the mountains were settled, Before the hills, I was brought forth;
While as yet He had not made the earth or the fields, or the beginning of the dust of the world.
When He prepared the heavens, I was there, When He drew a circle on the face of the deep,
When He established the clouds above, When He strengthened the fountains of the deep,
When He assigned to the sea its limit, So that the waters would not transgress His command,
When He marked out the foundations of the earth,
Then I was beside Him as a master craftsman; and I was daily His delight,
 Rejoicing always before Him, Rejoicing in His inhabited world,
And my delight was with the sons of men."
  
     There is a simple concept from this passage in Proverbs that we applied to the time of the Flood. Since 
God knew how to make it, He most certainly knew how to destroy it, in the most efficient way possible.
     Because of the genealogical list from Adam all the way to Noah, and extended on to include Abram, we can calculate that the Flood of Noah occurred about 1656 years after the fall. In reverse, there is sufficient archeological information to concluded that the flood occurred at about 2454 B.C.. From that time to now is only 4,460 years. ( For those of us who have a hard time adding anything with more than two digits, or balancing our check book; this would be adding the year 2006 A.D. to the year 2454 B.C. which equals 4,460 years. Bingo! the check book balances!)
     From this point on I want to tell you what happened in a more personal manner. The reason being, that I honestly was like a 'fish out of water' in regard to the types of information with which I was dealing. I found myself seriously pleading with God to open my mind, and help me understand His Word and what had happened to cause the Great Flood. I wanted His truth concerning the creation, the fall and the flood and I wanted them bad! It was during this time that I did a lot of 'jumping the fence' to try to understand all this from Gods' point of view.
     The most obvious question was; "What happened to cause such a large flood as described in the Genesis account?" The theory that was considered as the most likely at the time we were studying this, was that a large asteroid had hit the earth and caused it to tilt or tip on its' axis. This would cause flooding and other problems consistant with the Genesis account. But, we stumbled on to a slightly different approach. (Please remember that what we are discussing here is "theory" not fact. No matter what theory you or I 'lean' toward, none of them can be proven in a science lab. In other words, we can't make it 'fizz'. At least I don't think we can,...yet.)
     


(6)

     I was ready to work out the problem of The Flood, but I needed to run the whole thing past my son Jeremy. He understood more about science than I did, and I was hoping he could help. I called him up to our study and the following discussion took place. (as well as I can recall it.)
Me; " The theory I am aware of is that a large asteroid hit the earth and caused it to tilt on its' axis."
Jeremy; " Ya, but it would have taken a really large asteroid to do the kind of damage we're looking at."
Me, " How big are we talking about?
J.; " Don't know, but to cause the earth to tilt like they think it would, it would have to be gigantic. But 
    there's another problem. An asteroid the size we're talking about is extremely hot and would probably 
    cause the earth to burn rather than flood. Also, there's no record of an asteroid of that size ever hitting 
    the earth. The largest one hit down in the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico; called the Chicxulub Structure 
    that had an impact that would be a magnitude 13 or possibly higher. It left a crater that is 300 - km - 
    wide."
Me, " If that's the case, then what...."
     As I was looking at Jeremy, his eyes got big, like he just had something go through his brain that was like having all the lights in a house turned on at the same time.
Me, "You have a weird look on your face. What are you thinking? 
J., " The asteroid didn't hit the earth."
Me, "Ahhh.... O.K., then were did it hit?"
J., "It hit the moon!"
Me, "The moon? .... Uh, ...That's a new one."
J. " It's simple Physics. The Genesis account says that God was going to destroy the earth with a 'flood'. 
    So, what controls the tides of the ocean? The moon!     
     He went on to explain that, if a large enough asteroid hit the moon, it could cause it to shift its' orbit just enough to make the waters in the oceans around the earth (and other bodies of water too.) to be forced onto the land areas. This effect would continue for some time until the moon settled back into its original orbit (or possibly a change in orbit). Other bodies of water all over the world would be effected as well. Lakes, streams, underground tributaries, etc..
     After hearing this, Jeremy showed me his college Physics book that explained how the moon controls the tides on the earth. It reminded me of a time in California when I saw most of the water 'slosh' out of a three foot high Dough - Boy swimming pool after an earthquake.
     The next day I went down to a map store and found a world map that showed all the meteor and asteroid hits on the earth. There are approximately 140 craters that have been found on the earth. The largest is the one in Mexico that we mentioned earlier. Some of these could have been involved with causing The Flood.
     I also found an Astronomy book by Donald H. Menzel, that showed that the Moon has 400 trillion (that was not a misprint!) that are 10 centimeters in diameter and varying sizes up to 4,000 craters that are 10 kilometers in diameter. The largest is the Mare Orientale crater that has a diameter of more than 540 miles. 
     Remember what was said earlier after looking at the Proverbs passage? Since God knew how to make it, He most certainly knows how to destroy it. In what ever manner He chooses, and do it in such a way that it destroys only what God intends to destroy. I find it interesting that this 'hitting the moon' theory could be compared to a  'controlled explosion'. Like the ones used to take down buildings in the middle of a city block. In this case it would be a 'controlled flood', but on a God size proportion!
      (Genesis 7:21&22) "And all flesh died that moved on the earth: birds and cattle and beasts and every creeping thing that creeps on the earth, and every man. All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, all that was on the dry land died." 
    
(7)

 I have to admit, neither Jeremy or I were anticipating finding a different theory about how God may have brought about The Flood when we started this study. I do believe that God showed us this theory and I thank Him for helping us understand it. I am positive that this one came from Gods' side of the fence!
     You might think that our study should end about now, (some thought it should have ended on page one!) and you would be right except for one question that kept 'bugging' me. I could not escape the problem about the unexplained time (or no time) between the Creation and the Fall. I felt as if God was 'pressing' me to dig deeper into this issue about time, but I had no idea what I was supposed to find. All I could really say, with some confidence, is that there was something important that was being overlooked or misunderstood concerning 'time'. So, ...

- Let's Go In Reverse -    
(While 'hopping the fence' with God)

     When I find things that don't 'add up', either in life or in Scripture, I become skeptical  until I can unravel the 'hairball'. This was exactly the problem with the time between Creation and The Fall. As mentioned earlier in this study, in 1650 A.D. James Usher had calculated that from the time of the birth of Christ ( '0' ), to creation was 4004 years, (More recent calculations show the time to be closer to 4109 B.C.). However, Usher used the genealogical list that starts after the fall, beginning with how long Adam lived before his son Seth was born.(130 years, See Gen. Chapter. 5) It was hard for me to believe that Ushers' date to creation was also the time of the Fall. Something wasn't right, but I didn't know how to find the answer. So, I kept asking God about it. 
     After trying various things to resolve this 'time' question, I was becoming frustrated because there didn't seem to be a reasonable answer. Then one evening, (Nov. 2003) I went up stairs where I had a drafting table, on which I had a number of  books. One of them was Archaeology and The Old Testament, by: Merrill F. Unger. I had used it in an O.T. Archaeology class in 1974 at Moody Bible Institute. I opened it up right at page 46 (beginning of chapter 4) where there was an account of the Sumerian King List that reads; "According to the ancient Sumerian King List, preserved on the Weld-Blundell prism eight antediluvian (before the flood) rulers reigned over the lower Mesopotamian cities of Eridu, Badtibira, Larak, Sippar and Shuruppak for such a phenomenally long time (the shortest reign is 18,600 years, the longest 43,200 years) that the period of their combined rule totals 241,200 years." (page 46 of  Archaeology and the Old Testament, by Merrill F. Unger, Th.D, Ph.D.; Zondervan Publishing House, Grand Rapids, Michigan. 13th printing, 1973) This King List records Kings reigning before the flood and after the flood. But there was still a problem. Could this information be varified as a legitimate source. If 
this King List is a factual piece of Archaeology, then the information on it could very well confirm that 
there really was a time between the creation and the fall. As much as 241,200 years! Being the skeptic that 
I am about things like this, I thought I would try to find the actual book concerning the King List. So, I 
contacted the University of Boulder Library and they found the book in their archives. I checked the book 
out, and guess what? It's for real. The 'prism' on which the King List was inscribed is in the British 
Museum, London, England. The time that it was written dates back to about 2,000 B.C., just after the 
birth of Abraham, approximately 2,161 B.C., but before the death of Noahs' son Shem in about 1,951 B.C.
    
(8)

      The Sumerian King List presents us with an even more unbelievable situation. Were there Kings who reigned for thousands of years without dying? In the analysis of the Kings List, the people evaluating the official translation said; "Looking through these sources we find also that only a single point invites criticism. In the longest of them (the lists) the earliest rulers appear with abnormally long reigns, often as much as several hundred years. At a certain point the reigns then change and become quite normal, keeping within what seems humanly possible. That the immense reigns are unhistorical is obvious."(Thorkild, Jacobsen, The Sumerian King List. Assyriological Studies, XI (Chicago,1939)
     The conclusion of the people who evaluated the King List is perfectly understandable, but what would this look like from Gods side of the fence? 
     At the time, I didn't have the answer for this so, that evening before going to bed, I asked God to show me what the answer was. I remember being in that 'almost a dream state' when the thought went through my mind, "It's at the Fall."... "What's at the Fall?"... "The answer to your question." ..."I don't understand". ..."Death came at the Fall." By now I was starting to wake up and then it hit me. Because 'death' entered the world at the time of the fall, then the time before the fall was without death! This is a Biblical truth. It is also at the very center of why God sent His Son to die for all the world. The Biblical fact is that sin entered this world through Adam and Eve, and death through sin. (See: Romans, 5:12 & 6:23, I Corinthians, 15:21-22, and James 1:15 Include all surrounding verses and other appropriate ref.) 
     Okay, here's one of the more important reasons that all this is relevant. In man's endeavors to find out where he came from, (I'm speaking of both evolutionist and Christians) the concept of 'time' has been a major focal point. We mainly use it to refer to 'how old' something is or might be. The evolutionist claims that the world is millions even billions of years old. The Christian believes it is only 6100 yrs old. If what we have found concerning this 'space' between the end of Creation and the Fall is correct, then our method of using time in the afore mentioned manner has been wrong. Here's why. We can only refer to 'time' in conjunction with 'aging' from the Fall of man when 'death' entered the world to the present. Death and aging go hand in hand. They are both an 'errosion' process of man and the world in which we now live. Prior to the Fall there was no aging or death, so the understanding of time was not "How old are you?",but, "How many years have you existed?" Time itself didn't change at the Fall, and it is still the same today, but man (not God) started marking time by how long he lived. Adam knew he would die because of his sin. The question was,...when? (look at Genesis chapter 5, and the last half of  chapter 11) 
     Therefore, if you're trying to find the 'age' of this world or the universe, (unless you can find a way of measuring time that doesn't use aging) your wasting you're time because anything that goes past 4109 B.C. (give or take a little) did not age! Yes, that is what  I said, as strange as it sounds, it did exist! It just didn't get 'older'. Also, we need to politely change Ushers' 4004 B.C. date to the Fall, and not creation. 
     After figuring out this last bit of information, I told a Lady about what we had found and her response was; " If there is a space of time like you say, then why didn't God tell us about it or write it down for us? Is He trying to hide something from us?" As usual, I didn't know the answer to this question until almost a year later. Now I can tell you, that the answer is that God didn't write it down because He had left us physical evidence of the people who lived in this 'space in time' scattered all over the world for us to find.
     There have been numerous archaeological discoveries within the last 100 to 150 years that have revealed a substantial number of past civilizations. These have been found in Europe, Asia, Africa, South America, North America, Alaska and many other places. Many of these sites show that there were, in time past, civilizations that were highly advanced cultures. Most of these sites have structures such as pyramids, large buildings, designs that can only be seen from the sky, large stone carvings and more, that cannot be explained as to how they were built or who built them.
     

(9)
     Many of these sites show strong evidence that the structures were built in such a way as to tell the position of the sun, moon and stars. Some researchers believe this was done as a form of sun worship or other planetary worship. The better explanation is that they were positioned to determine the days, weeks, months and years as revealed in Genesis, 1: 14-15; " Then God said,' Let there be lights in the firmament  
of the heavens to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years; and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heavens to give light on the earth.'; and it was so."
     The following list of archaeoloical sites that relate to this description is a 'very short list'. There are many more that can be found in the proper resourses.
- Carnac, Brittany, France. Prehistoric menhirs and dolmans, thousands of which cover 15 miles of 
  Brittany coast.
- Olmec heads excavated in San Lorenzo, Mexico are one of the New World's greatest and oldest 
  mysteries.
- Giant stone spheres of unknown age, originally found in the jungles of Costa Rico and more recently in 
  Mexico, Aruba and Haiti, are exactly round.
- Non-Arctic animals unearthed in Alaska, Arctic Canada, Siberia, includes prehistoric horses, tigers 
  and mastodons.
- Prehistoric buildings at Point Barrows and Port Hope, Alaska which show the existence of an 
  advanced civilization.
- Ground markings in Nasca Valley and Desert that are so large they can only be seen from the sky and 
  were found only after the airplane were invented.
     
     The existence of these advanced civilizations brings up yet another set of questions. Who were they? Where did they come from? How did they develop their abilities to construct such incredible structures? There have been attempts to reproduce the methods used to build these large buildings, but (to me) they have not been very effective, primarily because of our assumptions as to the methods these civilizations actually used. As far as where they came from and how they acquired their abilities, there is an answer, but it's not one that will 'fizz or go boom' in the laboratory. 
     I believe that the answer to this question is in Scripture. But, I want to be careful to label it a 'possible' answer, simply because there is not enough information to do otherwise. First, let's go back to Genesis for a moment;
Genesis,1:26-28; "Then God said, 'Let us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness,
let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air,
and over the cattle, over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth." 
So God created man in His own image; in the image of God He created him;
male and female He created them.
Then God blessed them, and God said to them, 'Be fruitful and multiply;
fill the earth and subdue it; have dominion over the fish of the sea,
over the birds of the air, and over every living thing that moves on the earth." 
     The answer as to who these people were and how they acquired such incredible knowledge and abilities is at least partially answered in these verses. First, when God created Adam, He made him with the abilities, understanding and knowledge needed to care for all the earth over which God had given him dominion. To put it bluntly, ...Adam wasn't created as a 'dummy'! You might say that God, 'pre-programmed Adam with everything he needed to fulfill the job God wanted him to do. Next, the people 




(10)
who built these incredible civilizations came from the early off-spring of Adam and Eve. They would have had the same intellegence and abilities as the parents, from generation to generation until the Fall, when sin and death started erroding the mind and soul of all men and women. (Remember,Cain and Able came after the Fall.) If this analysis of the creation of man is a reasonable representation of this passage, then it could explain, in part, how these civilizations produced such amazing cities around the world.
     Earlier I pretty much 'slammed the door' on dating by an aging process, now let me open wide my mouth and shove my other foot in! Because there is a way of calculating dates in the past that has a great deal of promise. It's the science of  Dendrochronology. It is; "... namely the extension of a chronology back in time by the overlapping of successively older ring patterns." (from trees) There is no time here to explain all that is involved in the process of using tree rings as a 'silent chronometer' to determine the age of past history. However, a few of the 'tree chronologies' that have been developed include: The Oak of the British Isles; has dated back as far as 5,500 B.C. (as of 1982), The Giant Sequioa of California; one tree alone 'The General Sherman' is 3,500 yrs. old in 1989 would have been a 'sappling' about 1511 B.C.; The Bristlecone Pine chronology has been extended back as far as 8,500 to 9,000 years. If correct (or close) this would mean the oldest Bristlecone found to date (in the chronology) would 'predate' the fall of man by approximately 2,885 years or 6,994 B.C. This would be one more piece of information that could support the 'space' between creation and the fall theory.      
     The Dendrochronology process is fascinating and may extent tree chronologies a bit farther into the past. However, it is doubtful that it can reach much farther due to the relatively short time it takes for a dead or fallen tree to decompose. 

- A Few Loose Ends -     
( Don't forget the Dinosaurs)
     
      I've left this little 'tid bit' of information for last because of how well it fits into this space time theory.  It's about those elusive dinosaurs that everyone talks about. First, the name Dinosaur means; large or terrible lizard. (which everyone probably already knows) Also, it is a well known scientific fact that some reptiles continue to grow for most (if not all) of their lives, but their skin does not. Consequently, the reptile has to shed its skin once in a while. Some reptiles do this each year. (So, what's your point?) The point is; if there really was a space of time between the creation and the fall, where nothing aged or died, reptiles would have plenty of time to grow to the size of.... dinosaurs! There would be plenty to eat and all of them would have been herbivores because there was no death or corruption of the earth at that time. The age of these animals could have been several thousand years which would allow them to grow into the giant reptiles we call 'dinosaurs'. An unknown number of these dinosaurs would have died between the fall and the flood, but the rest would have been destroyed at the time the flood was on the earth leaving their remains in the 'dinosaur graveyards' and 'fossil fuel sites' (oil fields) that can be found all over the world.     

(11)
     From the beginning of this presentation I have tried to stay 'true' to the basic presuppositions that I outlined on the first page of this study. I am well aware that this is a new theory that has not been 'tested' by people outside my circle of influence, and therefore will probably come under some criticism by both religious people and those who have no desire to recognize God as the Great Creator. This is understandable. At the same time I would encourage anyone who truly wishes to understand this world we live in, to take the time and effort to search out Gods' truth in this area. There is much more to this than I have written and it may be that you are the one God wants to show it to!
- Proverbs 9:10 -
"The beginning of Wisdom is the fear of  Jehovah,
and the knowledge of the Holy Ones is understanding.
(Green, Interinear Bible)
