- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                        by: Dan Conley

- The Imminent Question -

     Within the bylaws and articles of just about every church, you can find a section that is dedicated to making a statement of faith, or as some call it a confession of faith. It usually consists of a list of statements that define or outline what that denomination or church believes concerning Biblical doctrines. If it is an evangelical church there will be at least one statement that will concern itself with the second coming of Christ. In many church statements the word "imminent" can be found, as in the following:

          "We believe in the personal, premillennial, and imminent return of our 
          Lord Jesus Christ. This blessed hope has a vital bearing on the personal
          life and service of each believer."

     There is no quarrel here with the fact of the second coming of Christ, or with the fact that Christ will come prior to His millenial reign on earth. What we wish to examine is the use of the word 'imminent' as a valid part of this statement.
     To begin with, the word 'imminent' is not found in the Biblical texts. It is also not listed in any of the following reference materials. Nave's Topical Bible; The New Bible Dictionary; Dictionary of the Bible, by John D. Davis (fourth edition published 1924); Vine's Complete Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words; Strong's Exhaustive Concordance; Young's Concordance. It is also not found in a number of Bible concordances including; Thompson's Chain Reference Bible and The New Scofield Reference Bible.
     To have a working definition of the word 'imminent' we must go to Webster's New World Dictionary, Second College Edition. (p.702)
          
          imminent - adj. [... to project over, threaten..., to project: see menace] likely
                        to happen without delay; impending; threatening: said of danger, evil,
                        misfortune, etc. -imminently adv.

     The two systematic theology references that I had available to me(I know there are many more), that made reference to the term 'imminent' were: Lectures in Systematic Theology, by Henry C. Thiessen; and Systematic Theology , by L. Berkhof.
     In chapter 39 of Dr. Thiessen's work he refers to 'imminent' only once in his study of the second coming of Christ. This is in the very first paragraph and is not mentioned again in the study. Dr. Thiessen presents a wonderful picture of Christ's return and the facts supporting His coming, but the aspect of Christ coming imminently is not supported in any way. The numerous verses that Dr. Thiessen uses (which can be found between pages 441- 450 of the 1971 edition.) for the second coming do make reference to the Lord coming "suddenly, quickly, soon, in the twinkling of an eye, as a thief in the night, etc.", but none of them use the term 'imminent'.
      

     
      One interesting note that is mentioned by Dr. Thiessen is; "It is only during the last sixty-five years that this doctrine has been restored to the Church, although there is still much indifference and opposition to it.". (Thiessen's book was first published in 1949. This would mean that the re-introduction he is describing began about 113 years prior to the date of this paper, 1997.) I can only assume that he is referring to the 'imminent' return of Christ. Unfortunately, his presentation of the second coming lacks sufficient documentation to support an 'imminent' return of Christ. 
      In Berkhof's Systematic Theology (p. 695-698 and following), the idea of an 'imminent' return of Christ is completely rejected. At one point he states; "This construction of the doctrine of the second coming (i.e. first; the coming in the clouds second; coming to establish His kingdom) is very convenient for the dispensationalists, since it enables them to defend the view that the coming of the Lord is imminent, but is not warranted by Scripture and carries with it un-Scriptural implications." He, along with others, would prefer to speak of the coming of Christ as "impending". He also notes that many of the references that are used to support the doctrine of an 'imminent' return, do not use words or phrases that can, or should be interpreted as meaning 'imminent'. (i.e., ...coming was near, suddenly, quickly, ... as a thief in the night, ...twinkling of an eye, suddenly, soon, quickly, etc.) To interpret any of these terms as 'imminent' would be an improper exegesis of the passages in question. 
     One other important observation is that the context of the passages that speak of Christ's return, would have to be ignored or somehow altered in order to have them conform to an 'imminent return' doctrine. This would be a rather interesting accomplishment!

- Before We Continue -

     As far back as I can remember I have been taught that the return of our Lord Jesus Christ was imminent. Up until a few years ago I had not questioned its validity. It has only been since I began comparing my own theological beliefs to God's overall character and making sure that the context of a passage was not being violated,(as best as my finite mind can comprehend) that I have found  a few doctrines that I needed to examine more carefully. Also, I started doing this because I was finding too many people who  were using a form of Bible study that was fragmented and disregarded the context of the passages being studied. This lack of proper Bible study methods was producing strange results and sometimes dangerous doctrinal systems. In order to defend against this I continued (as it says in John 3: 16-21) taking all my theology to Christ's light in order to get His truth in every way. This has been a tremendous blessing, but it has also been difficult when it comes to major doctrines such as the one we are examining in this paper. When I initially started  praying and meditating on this particular doctrine, and considering God's character, I knew that if what I was coming to understand was true, it would not set well with many people or with denominations that hold this doctrine as true. But if I am to hold true to cultivating the mind of Christ and moving closer to God the Father, I must stay the course and stand firm on the truth of His word as it conforms to His character. Lets see what the results of this study reveal.

     - After... The Before We Continue -

     There are at least two areas we should look at before trying to come to a conclusion on this issue. First, we need to check the context of the verses being used in order to be sure that we understand what the 'human' author is trying to present. Second, we need to check whatever we find against God's own character (as best as we can understand it) to be sure that we are not inadvertently misrepresenting Him due to our human fallibility.

- Context -

     Because of the vast number of verses that present the second coming of Christ we will only be able to examine a small number of them in this presentation. (As mentioned earlier, Dr. Thiessen's book; pages 441-450 lists a large number of them.) We will concern ourselves only with those passages that relate to the question of the 'imminent' return of Christ. Also, I am not going to copy these passages into this paper because of their length and the time it would take to copy them. So, keep your Bible handy and look them up as we go and read the verses before and after the given passages as well.
     Matthew chapter 24:25-28; "...v27 For just as the lightening comes from the east, and   
flashes to the west, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be." At first glance, it would be easy to conclude that this verse is telling us that the return of our Lord can happen at any time and is imminent. But there are other parts of chapter 24 of Matthew that address the issue of Christ's coming and have direct bearing on how we should interpret the above passage. Verses 36-44 tell us that God the Father is the only one who knows , "...that day and hour..." when Christ will return. v.37 says that it will be as the time of Noah when they were eating and drinking, etc., and God saved only Noah and his family. (This is referred to in 2 Peter 2:4-9 as well.) By looking at the whole chapter, the possibility of v.27 referring to an 'imminent return' becomes doubtful. It would be more consistent with the context to conclude that at the time of Christ's return it will happen as fast as lightening comes from the east, and flashes to the west. This fits the context and conforms to the restraints on time alluded to in verses 36-39. (It would take some time before this world was as bad as the world before the time of the flood. It's getting there, but it's not there yet!) 
     Mark chapter 13; This is a parallel to the Matthew chapter we have just examined. Verse 32 tells us again that only God the Father knows the day or hour when Christ will return. The end of this chapter is strong in encouraging us to "be alert - for we do not know when the master of the house is coming,..." (Be sure to read the whole chapter).
     I Corinthians 15: 50 -52; In this passage we must keep in mind not only the context of the passage, but the reason the Apostle Paul is writing the letter in the first place. He is in the process of correcting errors in the theology of the people in Corinth, (They had a lot of them... errors that is). The primary problem he is correcting concerns those who have died before Christ's return. Will they too be raised from the dead and taken to heaven at the time of Christ's return? Answer: Yes absolutely! (v.50-52) Also, it will happen so fast, it will be done, "in the twinkling of an eye,...". But again, this is not referring to when Christ will come, but to how quickly this event will happen when He does come.
     
     1 Thessalonians 4: 13-5:11; This passage is almost a repeat of the Corinthian passage above. It is also dealing with the question of those who die before the return of Christ. There is mention in verse 1-11 of chapter 5, that the Lord will come "as a thief in the night". This is obviously an expression of an unexpected event and could be considered a case for an 'imminent return' if it weren't for the surrounding verses. The context would suggest that the unbeliever who is feeling safe and peaceful will be the one who is overtaken by "the thief in the night", while those who believe are alert, sober, and waiting for Christ's return.
     2 Thessalonians 2:1-12; "Now we request you, brethren, with regard to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together to Him, that you may not be quickly shaken from your composure or be disturbed either by a spirit or message or a letter as if from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord has come." This sounds like somebody was sending false letters to the churches (maybe even signing Paul's name to them) proclaiming that the return of Christ had already happened. I'm sure as soon as the Apostle found out about this he sent out this letter without delay. For our study, however, what is enlightening is that the Apostle lists several events that must take place before the return of Christ. Apostasy, man of lawlessness revealed, the son of destruction, the removing of the one who restrains him now, etc.. This passage is not one that would support an imminent return of Christ doctrine.
     2 Peter 3:8-18; The Apostle Peter, here, is addressing the problem of 'mockers'  that are claiming that Christ will never return and His promises are not valid. Peter reminds his readers that, (v.8)"...with the Lord one day is as a thousand years , and a thousand years as one day." Two verses in this passage (v9 and v15) are statements to the effect that our Lord is slow to return, and patient toward those who do not believe so that they may find salvation. This puts a totally different perspective on the question of an imminent return of Christ. According to this passage, an imminent return of Christ is not reasonable to assume. 
      There are over three hundred  passages that concern the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in the New Testament alone. We have only looked at a small fraction of them.

- God's Character -
(The ultimate test)
       
     There are several aspects of God's character that are easily identified when He is dealing with mankind. His love, mercy, anger, wrath, faithfulness are just a few. The Scriptural examples are plentiful. However, we will only examine a few of the ones available.
     One of the first examples is Noah and the flood. Here, God tells Noah that He is going to destroy the world (all flesh) with a flood and that Noah is to build an ark in order to escape. In chapter six of Genesis, God's character shows through in several places. (v3) God is angry with man's sin to the point that He is going to destroy them. At the same time we can see His mercy because He is not going to destroy the earth for another 120 years. (v.8) We can also see His grace as it is poured out on Noah and his family. Most importantly, we see His longsuffering and enduring of man's sin to the point 
 
that only eight people were saved out of the flood. In other words, God waited until there were no other people who would turn back to Him before destroying all flesh from the earth. (In Matthew chapter 24, Jesus makes reference to the time of His coming again as being the same as the time of Noah. 2 Peter reminds us that only Noah and his family were saved on the ark.)     
     Another place we see God's character is just before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen.18 & 19). Abraham pleads with the Lord to spare the two cities if there are any righteous people in it. Abraham starts with fifty people and works it down as far as ten people before the Lord finally leaves to destroy the cities. As you know, Lot and his wife along with his two daughters were the only people to escape the destruction. However, Lot's wife is destroyed because she disobeys the command not to look back at the cities. Again we see the same characteristics of God that we saw before. His mercy is infinite.
     In the book of Jonah, the city of Nineveh was spared destruction after Jonah reluctantly went and preached God's word to them. They escaped destruction at that time by repenting of their sins and turning to God, but were destroyed 100 years later. God's mercy, longsuffering and patience with the people of Nineveh is without question. (Except maybe to Jonah. He was 'ticked' when God didn't destroy the city!)
    
- Conclusion -

     Even though this study has not been exhaustive, I believe there is enough information to suggest that the presenting of the return of our Lord Jesus Christ as being 'imminent' is not consistent with the context of the passages examined or with God's character in relation to His love for the lost, mercy, longsuffering, etc.. It would seem that the use of the "impending" or even "soon coming" might be more appropriate.

Q. "Dan, since you've done this study, do you believe that Jesus Christ will return?"
A. "Absolutely!"
Q. "Do you think you know when He will come?"
A. "No, not really."
Q. "Is there anything in Scripture that might give us some clue as to when Christ might   
       return?"
A. "Yes. Matthew 24; 2 Peter 2&3 tell us that there are some things to watch out for. One  
       of these is that before the reurn of Christ our world will be just like the time of Noah  
       before the flood. If I understand this, it means that there will be increased violence  
       and there will be fewer and fewer believers as time goes on."
Q. "What should Christians be doing while waiting for Christ's return?
A. "We should have the same mind as the Apostle Peter by recognizing this time as an  
      opportunity to lead more people to the Savior. We should see the time between 
      Christ's ascension and His return as God's infinite love and patience for mankind.
     
 
