- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley
  (1988; Revised 2009)
- The Little Bitty Box -

     Have you ever noticed how people want to have a God that they can understand? One, that doesn't require a whole lot of research and fits within man's ability to comprehend. One that doesn't bother us all the time? Better yet, one that fits into our own comfy 'little bitty box'? Well this true story isn't about being able to understand and grasp everything about the almighty, infinite God, but it is about a special time in my life when I learned the value of one 'little bitty box'.
    In the early part of 1987 I became friends with a young man named Pete Ramos. He was a young, 28 year old college-career man who sold insurance for a living. He was engaged to a very nice young lady that he loved deeply.
     During that summer Pete and I would get together from time to time, and discuss his business and always get into something about Christ and the Scriptures. Pete was learning how to let God be in control of his life and his financial situation, which is hard for all of us. As the summer progressed he became stronger in his ability to give 'everything to God'. It was a joy to see how he was growing in Christ and share his  excitement when he could see how God was working in his life. 
     I have forgotten the exact time, but somewhere around the beginning of December, Pete was trying to decide what to get his fiancee for Christmas. By the middle of the month he still had not found anything. Since he knew that I did wood working, and had made a number of things out in my garage, he ask me if I would help him make something for his fiancee. I told him I would, but he had to get involved too. He had never made anything out of wood in his life. For me, it was not a big deal, it was a little project that was a 'piece of cake'. After talking it over, Pete wanted to make a music box. I had all the wood and the tools we would need to get the job done, and a couple of music box mechanisms for Pete to choose from. We got together in my garage only a couple of  times and Pete sanded down the box, sprayed it with a good finish an in no time the project was done. Well before the Christmas deadline. 
     Pete was ecstatic, he had made something with his own two hands that he could give to his fiancee. It was like he had 'gold' in his hands! He was as pleased as could be and so was his fiancee when she received the gift. But what we didn't know, was that this would be the last Christmas for Pete.
     If my memory serves me correctly, in mid-January of 1988 Pete was diagnosed with a rare blood disorder that caused his body to retain too much iron in his system. He was hospitalized for a short time to see if they could get this problem under control. They did for a time but, in late February he was rushed to the Stanford Medical Center and by the time I could drive across the San Francisco Bay to the hospital, Pete had passed away. He went to be with his Lord and Saviour on the 24th of February .He was only 29 years old. He was laid to rest on Feb. 29,1988.
     The years of 1987 and 1988 were particularly hard for me. My father had passed away on January 5,1987; one day after my sons birthday on January 4th, and only eight days after my own birthday Dec. 28th. To top it off, the funeral for my Dad was on by wifes' birthday, Jan.10th. There were others who passed away as well, but I will remember Pete for the rest of my life. This is because through my short time of knowing Pete, God taught me the value of doing the 'little things' he asks me to do, they can be more important then I might think. 
     Do you really want to know how big God is? Do the little things that He asks of you first! You will be amazed how big He is, in the middle of  'little things'! Don't wait, now is the only time we have.

                                                                                                            Sincerely In Christ,
                                                                                                                 Dan Conley
