- Random Thoughts About the Relationship Between God, Creation and Man -

  After having studied my way  through the first ten to eleven chapters of Genesis I have found myself revisiting and rethinking some of the subtle implications of  what is in those few chapters. The list below starts with the following;
#1 Because God created the heavens and the earth with lights that 'ruled both the day and the night skies it is easy to conclude that God did not intend man to live in darkness on earth, or in His presents. These 'lights' were not limited only to the sun, moon, and stars that we normally think of. If you look closer at the Genesis text and try to 'visualise' what was actually there, you will see that there was light from the sun and moon shining 'through the "waters" that were above the expanse and the earth below.' If you were standing on the ground, this light shining through the ice (or waters) might have looked  like an unamaginal 'rainbow and light show' sparkling and moving above you by day and the Aurora Brealis, Australis or Poaris, from one end of the sky to the other by night. There would never have been a time when the earth was 'in the dark' as we have now. 
#2  There are several places in Genesis 1-11 where man, or the earth, is 'cursed' by God because of mans sin. Some are obvious, others are not. For example; in Gen. 3 God tells Eve that she will have "...I will greatly multiply your sorrow and your conception; in pain you will bring forth children;..." This is an obvious reference to giving birth. However, there is a very real 'pain in child birth' that is the result of sin and death coming into the world through Adam and Eves sin. It is in chapter four. The murder and death of Eves son Able and her other son Cain being 'branded' as an outcast and a murderer.
     I have seen more than once a mother weeping over the death of their child. There is something about a child dying before the parents that is catastrophic to a mother. This, I believe, is a hidden curse that is rarely recognized.
#3 When Noah and his family came out of the Ark God told Noah in Genesis 8:22 "While the earth remains, seed time and harvest, cold and heat, winter and summer, and day and night shall not cease." This passage looks quite innocent, so what's the problem? The problem is that the world that Noah and his family were use to living in before the flood, no longer exists! It has been destroyed and the earth they are now looking at is nothing like the earth they were use to. The sky is difference, rain is now part of their lives and most of the things mentioned in the above passage they have never had before. Especially 'cold, heat, winter, summer and even the daytime sky and the night sky are not what they were to seeing. They have all changed. The eating of animals was now part of their diet (Gen.9:1-5) . This too looks likes a fairly simple and straight forward statement, but there are some hidden curses within God's message to Noah and his family. The cold and heat, winter and summer, etc. are describing the continuing curses of the ground that was proclaimed to Adam at the fall. Also, the items listed are all destructive elements that will eventually destroy this earth. We live with them everyday and all year long and rarely recognize them are a part of the curse that was started at the Fall, continued  at and after the flood, and will continue until the earth is destroyed after God redeems all those who believe in His Son.
