
- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                by: Dan Conley
               ( Summer of 1990)
- Love vs.  ? -

     During the mid 1960's to the early 1970's when I was in high school and college, the subject of love was one of the hottest items of discussion in the East Bay of San Francisco where I grew up. It was second only to discussions about Vietnam, Nixon or the government in general. Most churches at some time preached or taught the three types of love found in the Scriptures (i.e. agape, phileo and  eros). While the secular world was promoting "love ins", the local Christians were promoting "love feasts", or as some people called them "agape feasts".
     In many of the discussions about love there would usually be some remark concerning how there was so much hatred and anger in the world. Because of the Vietnam War and the political upheaval throughout our own country, it was easy to accept the idea that hate and love were opposites. Hatred and anger were all around us. The love of God (agape) was the obvious answer to the problem. (At least to those of us who had accepted Christ as our Saviour.) Often  I John 4:20 would be used to support the fact that we could not hate our brother while claiming to love God at the same time. It was an open and shut case. At least it seemed to be ... until about five years ago.
     It was my brother-in-law, Chuck, who started me thinking about all this again (so it's all his fault!) after we had moved to Colorado in 1989. Our two families had taken a drive up toward Dillon Lake for the day and as usual our conversation turned to Scripture. He asked me what I thought the opposite of love might be. I responded that the opposite of love was hate. I may have even used  I John 4:20 to back up my position. It was what he said after this that stopped me cold. He said, "Have you ever considered the possibility that the opposite of love is fear?". I had not. I felt sure that hate was the opposite. However, my misconception was about to be exposed and then corrected.
     Chuck pointed out the following verses from  I John 4: 12, 13, 16-18.

          12) No one has beheld God at any time; if we love one another, God
           abides in us, and His love is perfected in us.13) By this we know that           
           we abide in Him and He in us, because He has given us of His Spirit. 
          16) And we have come to know and have believed the love which God
           has for us. God is love, and the one who abides in love abides in God,
           and God abides in him. 17) By this love is perfected with us, that we 
           may have confidence in the day of judgment; because as He is, so are 
           we in this world. 18) There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts
           out fear, because fear involves punishment, and the one who fears
           is not perfected in love.

     Even at first glance I could see that Chuck could have a valid point. If perfect love (in the verses used, "agape" is the love being referred to.) casts out fear, then God's perfect love and fear can not co-exist with each other. They might be true opposites, but I needed more information before coming to a conclusion.
p.1

     A few days later I started doing a little more "digging" into this idea. I looked up "hate" in my Bible's Concordance and found a number of references to God having hate toward sin of various kinds. Proverbs 6:16 "These six things doth the Lord hate; yea, seven are an abomination unto him:". It goes on to list things that the Lord (God or Christ) hates. Strong's Concordance lists even more references that speak of what God hates.
     Next I looked up "fear". There are numerous references concerning the "fear of the Lord"  and man's fear of God and death, etc. However, I could not find one reference that suggested that God had any "fear" as a part of His character. Our God is totally without fear. It does not exist in His realm at all!! 
     I know Christ as my Saviour. I know that I have His love within me. II Timothy 1:7 says; "For God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind." But if this is true, then why do I still experience fear? Where does it come from? In God's character, His perfect love and fear do not exist together, so why do they both exist in my life even though I'm a believer? (Good question grasshopper!! Look in Genesis 3: 8-10, you'll find the answer there.)
          
          8) And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in
          the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the 
          presence of the Lord God among the trees of the garden. 9) And the
          Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? 10)
          And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because
          I was naked; and I hid myself.

     In interpreting this passage, I believe I am correct in saying that at the time of the fall, man not only brought death into the world, but he also brought "fear" into his own heart,  mind and soul. Fear toward the very God that loves him. Fear that stands as a reminder of our sin nature. It is possible that this same fear will be the cause of many deaths in the end times as is mentioned in Luke 21:25-26:
          
          25)And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars;
          and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the
          waves roaring; 26) Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking
          after those things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of 
          heaven shall be shaken.

     The farther mankind gets from God's love, the  greater the fear he will experience. This can be true of Christians as well. When we fall away from God's love and care we set ourselves up for the "fears of this world" to stop us from reaching out to the unsaved in love. Matthew 24: 12 says, "And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall grow cold." When I first read this verse I thought it was talking about the love of non-Christians, but the love mentioned here is "agape". It comes from God through Christ, no other way. 
p.2


The more we focus on this troubled world and its' violent and corrupt ways, the easier it becomes to be in fear for our own safety. This can lead to indifference to the lost souls around us and a hardened and cold heart without God's love for those who need Him.
     There is one other part of the I John 4 passage we might look at before offering a statement about what has been looked at so far. It's in verse 17; "..., that we may have confidence in the day of judgment; because as He is, so are we in this world." Simply put; there can be a tremendous peace and confidence within us, during times of trouble, if we are allowing the Holy Spirit and His love to guide us. It would seem,(and I hope I'm not taking this to far) that John is saying we can be free from fear during times of persecution or judgment on earth in the same way God is free from fear because of His character. His perfect love casts out fear.
     After examining the above information I think it is safe to conclude that God's "agape" love and "fear" are truly opposites. This, however, will not hold true if we are talking about "love" as defined by the secular world. To conclude this section let me restate:
              
              "Because God is Love (agape), and perfect Love casts out fear,
                it is reasonable to conclude that fear is the opposite of Love and
                contrary to Gods character. God and fear do not and cannot 
                exist together. Our God is totally without fear. God is Love." 

   
- Some Personal Thoughts - 

     When I was thinking about this subject I thought there might be some forms of fear that were excluded. Such fear of fire, drowning, death etc.. However, while writing this paper I realized there are scriptural examples of people who faced these threats and came through with flying colors. For fire there is the example in the book of Daniel of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego who were thrown into the fiery furnace and came out alive. Others came to mine such as Moses and his fear of going back to Egypt and fear of presenting himself before Pharaoh. Daniel could have been fearful of death by being eaten by lions, yet he was not. Jonah and his fear of witnessing to the city of Nineveh. He ran away from God, but God showed Jonah that He was able to do what Jonah thought impossible.
     There are many more examples that could be used, but my point is this; I realized that there is no fear that we face that God cannot over come as long as we allow Him to control our lives. I also found that fear is spiritually debilitating. It attacks our actions of faith in Gods ability to do His will through us. Fear stops us from telling others about Christ because the person we talk to may have a negative reaction to what is said, or that we may not be able answer their questions. 
     I can honestly say that I don't hate the people around me, but have to admit to times of fear because of the violence and possibility of rejection by those I approach. I know I'm not alone in this. Many excuses are given for not doing what God wants us to do. Most of the excuses are because of an underlying fear, not hate. 
     May God fill us with His perfect Love and drain us of our fear, so we can serve Him
in Love.    
  
p.3             


