- Personal Testimony -
of
Dan Conley

     I was born in Livermore, California on December 28, 1949. Two weeks later my parents placed me in the cradle roll of the First Baptist Church of Hayward, California. Therefore, I am safe in claiming that I started going to church at an early age! 
     Although I officially went forward for salvation and baptism at the age of nine, I am reasonably sure that I had asked Christ into my heart at an earlier age. One reason I believe this to be true is because I lead one of my classmates (Rodney Nordstrom) in a prayer for salvation when I was in kindergarten at the age of five. Whether or not we knew what we were doing is obviously questionable, but there we were sitting on the floor, playing with blocks and talking about Jesus. I don't know what happened to Rodney, but I'll never forget that experience. I wish I could meet with him sometime and find out if he remembers that day in kindergarten when we prayed together. He might not remember, but I am sure God does.
     Throughout my younger years I was always involved with Sunday School and other church activities. Christmas plays, memorizing verses, Sunday School contests, music and more. I even helped out when the church moved to a new location and put up a new building. I was able to help nail sheetrock, tape and texture and paint. All within the confined of one closet and with guidance from an adult! It was a lot of fun.
     As far back as I can remember, I have been involved in music. However, it was when I was in Junior High that somebody got me into a youth quartet and I sang the tenor part for a Sunday evening service. I was thirteen at the time. From that time until the present I have been involved with special music, choirs, trios, quartets, song leading, choir directing and more. I have been invited to other churches to give gospel concerts on a number of occasions. When I was in High School I started learning to play the guitar and banjo. I have used both instruments in gospel concerts as well as for leading singing or special music for many years.
     From grade school all the way through high school I continued to talk to people about Christ. I witnessed to my team mates on the track team whenever I could, handed out tracts and tried  my best to be an example to them. I would talk with any one who was interested. One time a girl in my speech class challenged me to prove that there really was a God. She claimed to be a atheist and didn't believe anyone could prove that God really existed. I took up the challenge! With a little help from my pastor, the following week I presented my speech on the existence of God by using; the Ontological, Cosmological, Teleological, Ethnological and Moral arguments. I got an A+ on the speech, made the girl who had challenged me madder than a wet cat, and caused many other students to have to rethink their position on God.
     While I was still in Junior High school, the First Baptist Church of Hayward went through a "split". I have never been sure why this happened, but the result was that our family (due mostly to the insistence of my mother) went with the people who left the church. They started a small church called Bethany Baptist Church of Hayward. It was 



at this small "grass roots" church that many of the youth learned something of what it meant  to be a leader and a servant to others. We elected our own president, vice pres., secretary and people in charge of social activities. We found out how hard it can be to get people to agree on something. I was the president on several occasions as well vice pres. and social chairman at other times. It was a good, but sometimes frustrating, learning experience. It was also at this church that I got my first congregational song leading opportunities. I lead singing on Sunday evenings for at least three years while I attended this church.
     There were other opportunities for service that came with being at this small church of about fifty to seventy people. Once a month the young people would go to a rest home and provide a church service for the elderly. When the school year was over, some of us would help out with vacation Bible school. During the summer months and on some Saturdays during the school year, I would ride my bicycle over to the church and go "visiting" with the pastor. Rev. Durban would take me with him while he went door to door in the neighborhood or when he was calling on some one who had recently visited the church. I asked him one time if he was ever afraid when he went calling. He told me that it didn't make much difference because even if he was afraid he knew that God wasn't so "let's go anyway!". That's one thing I've never forgotten. I might be scared,  but God's not, so let's go! There is no fear in God. It does not exist in His character.

- A Time of Dedication -

     The Baptist denomination has always been strong in the area of encouraging their people to go into full time service when they got out of High School and College. I can recall a number of services where preachers would put forth the call for those who would be a missionary or a pastor. I never felt comfortable when they started asking for volunteers. It wasn't that I didn't want to serve God and Christ, it was simply that I didn't want to make a promise to God that I might not be able to keep. I didn't want to have to explain to God, at some later date, that I didn't know what I was getting myself into, or that it was all just a bad mistake. I just didn't feel comfortable with that kind of commitment. It was too much for me to handle.
     One Sunday evening our youth group went to a youth "sing night" at another church in our area. These were held once a month and each month they would be held at a different church within our denomination. It was during one of these services that the speaker began "the call". I sat waiting to hear the usual plea for workers, pastors and missionaries. Then the pastor asked for something that completely surprised me. He asked, "Is there anybody here that would want to dedicate their life to living for Jesus Christ one day at a time?". He went on to explain that this commitment to God and Christ prepares a person for whatever God would have them do in the future, because Christ was now in control of their life. It also did not eliminate the possibility of going into full time Christian work at some later date. At the same time it challenged a person to live a Christ like life no matter where they were or what they were doing  for a living.




 It made sense to me. This kind of a commitment I could make! That night I dedicated myself to Christ to live one day at a time for Him. This I have done to the best of my ability and  with God's help since the summer of 1966.
     At the time I made this commitment I didn't know how all encompassing it was. As the years have passed I have learned that there is a great deal more to it than meets the eye. When I consider my home life with my mom in the picture, this commitment takes on a completely different meaning.

- Mom -
                                                      
     If you were to meet my mother you would probably think she was a very nice lady and that she was a loving person. You would also think she was a kind and gentle person who wouldn't hurt anyone. Unfortunately, you would be wrong. The fact is that my mom has been able fool a great number of people for a long time as to her real character. When she is at church she is a model Christian, but to those who really know her, she is a dangerous, volatile person filled with an anger that can only be described as demonic. At the same time, she is highly religious! 
     There was a day when I was about seven or eight years old that I will not soon forget. I was practicing the piano and having trouble hitting the right note. I didn't read music very well and for some reason I kept missing the same note. My mother rushed in claiming that I was making the mistake on purpose and started yelling at me. She was furious! As she kept yelling, some how she managed to blame all the family troubles on me. The next thing I can remember is that she was threatening to leave all of us and divorce by dad. She ran to their back bedroom and closed the door. I ran back crying loudly telling her I was sorry for what I had done and please don't leave. It seamed like forever, but she finally opened the door. She had a suitcase in her hand and one on the floor next to her. I was horrified and scared! I thought I was the cause of all this. She made me promise never to do anything to "defy" her again. I didn't even know what defy meant, but I agreed anyway. It would be years later before my sister would tell me that she had heard my mom "rattling" the suitcases and that they were empty all along. My mom had lied, and deceived me. All this because I couldn't hit the right note on the piano.
     When my sister was in her senior year of high school (I was in 9th grade), she had come to the end of her rope with my mom. Sue was ironing at the time and my mom did something that set her off. (I honestly can't remember what it was. All I can remember is what happened afterward.) What  I can recall very clearly, is that they were both yelling at each other. Then they started to physically fight each other. My sister got a bloody nose and ran to her room. My mom chased after her and they fought some more in my sisters' bedroom. What I saw next can never be erased from my mind. They were both on the bed, my mom was sitting on Sues' chest with her knees on Sues' shoulders. Sue was crying and yelling. My mom was smiling and laughing, her eyes were wide open and looked as if they were puffed out.  My mom was actually enjoying this. It looked demonic!
     


     Sue finally got my mom off of her and ran out of the house and down the street. My mom yelled at me telling me to go after her. Just before I left I heard my mom call my dad at work and tell him he had to come home because Sue had gone crazy. I ran after Sue, but not with the thought of bringing her back. Sue went over to the pastors' house (about 1-1/2 miles). I ran back home and told my mom where Sue had gone. My dad got home a few minutes later and my mother started to paint her side of the story. It was ugly.
     A short time past and the pastor (Rev. Joast) brought Sue back into the house. He tried to find out what had happened, but his attempts were fruitless. My mom flew into another rage and began blaming everything on him. She claimed that the pastor had brainwashed Sue and that he was the blame for everything. He stormed out of the house saying, "I don't have to take this kind of abuse!" He may not have had to, but we were still left with momma. She could still "blow up" without warning! Who would be next?
      Rev. Joast was the pastor of Huntwood Baptist Church in Hayward, California. After the incident with my sister, my mom changed churches. We changed churches several times because my mom got mad at some one. She has never faced the problem that she has concerning her violent temper or her anger. As far back as I can remember my mom has been like this.
     It was a Saturday evening during the summer. We had just gotten home and I was knocking at the back door, trying to get my older brother (who had stayed home), to come open the locked. I knocked several times. My mom came up behind me as I knocked again. This time Dave came to the door, opened it and said, "Why didn't you use a key?". Before I could answer or even move, my mom charged around me and started yelling at Dave. She started kicking him with the heavy hiking boots that she was wearing. I kept a low profile and my mouth shut. She continued to yell and kick him all the way into our bedroom. She turned around and went away. We thought it was over. We were wrong. She came back and kicked him a few times more, yelling at him at the same time. It was a living nightmare.
     When I was young, I thought that I really was a disobedient child. I had to be, because that's what my mom made me believe. When I got into my college years I started talking to my relatives, aunts, uncles, my dads' mother (grandma) and found out that they knew all about my mom. Fortunately they told me the truth about her and I finally started to realize who the true problem child was. Even my moms' own sisters knew that she an angry person. They had seen it when they were kids back in Florida.
     When I talked to my dads' mom, years later, she told me that on at least two occasions my dad had seriously considered divorcing my mother. But he couldn't do it because he knew that if he did, all of us kids would more than likely be put in my moms' custody. He wouldn't do that to us. He loved us and didn't want us to be left with her without his protection. So he stuck it out. For us kids we lived with it until each of us were able to go out on our own and support ourselves. That was the only answer we had at that time.
     


     
           
     What makes all this even more complicated is that my mom honestly does not remember any of these problems and becomes angry if we try to discuss them with her. We have, over many years, come to the conclusion that she does have a serious mental problem that has never been dealt with. However, at the same time, it is one of those strange dilemmas of life that makes family members  powerless to do anything to change the situation. 
     For myself, I have forgiven my mom for the things she did to us as children and even some things that she did later on in life. But unfortunately, I do not have a good relationship with her even to this day. Most of my relatives, including my sister and brother simply stay away from her. We do keep track of where she is and how she is doing, but we do it indirectly through a few select people who are aware of the situation. This is not what I would have wanted if I could have had a choice, but this seems to be the way it will stay for now.

- College Years - 

     Before I graduated in 1968 from Tennyson High School in Hayward, California; I found myself facing a rather large "fork" in the road of my life. Again the Baptist church I went to was big on encouraging their young people to go to a Christian College and then into Christian work of some sort. I was considered a prime candidate for such work because of my musical abilities and my commitment to live for Christ. Unfortunately, God was not leading me in that direction at that time. I had struggled and prayed about what to do and believed God was leading me to go to a local Jr. College. I wasn't sure why, but I knew that was what He wanted me to do. Needless to say, the people at my church thought I had done nothing less than abandon my commitment to Christ and had thrown away any future hope of doing Christian work.
     Another thing that caused my church family to think that I was committing spiritual suicide was that after graduation from high school, I went to work at the steel mill where my father worked. I worked a "grave yard" shift that started at 11:00 at night and ended at 7:00 in the morning. Because of the schedule, I got off work on Sunday morning at 7a.m. and rarely made it to a Sunday morning church service. I realized a few years later that it was the "legalistic" attitude of this church that was causing the problem, not that I was missing church services or going to a secular college.
     That summer of 1968 was the first time I had a full time job. I had taken it in order to help pay my way through College. I was hired as a laborer at an hourly rate of $2.94.(At that time that was considered good. Especially when you consider that the minimum pay at that time was $1.25 an hour.) The work was hot, dirty and dangerous! There was hot molten steel everywhere, oil from old cars, water mixed with oil, dirt mixed with oil, jagged pieces of steel sticking out of rail cars and the smell of burning oil combined with molten steel was constantly in the air. It was, and still is, the dirtiest most dangerous job I have ever had. However, I thank God I had the opportunity to be there. I now knew from personal experience what my father had been doing  for a living. Day in, day out,  as a crane operator in the hottest part of the mill where they poured the molten steel into molds to make ingots of steel. He did this faithfully for twenty-seven years in order to 

meet the needs of his family. Commitment! Compared to what my father had been doing, I didn't even know the meaning of the word. I thank God for my fathers' example! May I never forget it!
     At the end of that summer was accepted at Chabot Jr. College in Hayward, California. My first year of college was rather uneventful. The Vietnam war was in full swing so I made sure I kept my grades up high enough to keep from getting a "free trip" to Vietnam from Uncle Sam. 
     The summer of 1969 came and I worked in a Maytag warehouse with a bunch of truck drivers who thought I was crazy for reading my Bible during lunch. As far as I could tell, they had no visible signs of wanting to know God in any way, shape or form. The summer ended quickly and it was again time for school. But this second year was to be one of the most spiritually challenging times of my life. I was about to be a small part in a true spiritual revival!
     In October of 1969 a group of fourteen students, including myself, got together to start a Bible study on the Chabot College campus. There were other groups already present; the Baptist Club, Pentecostal Club, Campus Crusade even a Catholic Club. I can't honestly remember why none of us didn't want to be a part of these existing clubs except that being a part of a "denominational" based Bible study turned us off. We were more interested in just studying the Bible rather than being Baptist, or Pentecostal or whatever. So, late in 1969 we were officially accepted as a new group on campus known as "New Life".
     We started meeting once a week and used the book of John for our first Bible study. I was elected to be the first President, Barry Frankalino was the Vice President and a little 4'11" tall girl with long blond hair, by the name of Gay Thompson was the secretary. (She would become my wife on July 20, 1974.) This little group of fourteen soon found itself growing beyond its' wildest dreams. Before the school year ended, it had grown to over 65 people and was now meeting twice a week on campus. People were witnessing outside and inside the classrooms. We were holding outdoor gospel presentations. We invited gospel music groups to the campus. On one occasion we brought in a group called C.W.L.F. ( Christian World Liberation Front), an Christian group that was from the Berkeley area. Boy were they a surprise! But we saw God work in miraculous ways. People were getting saved each day. I had never seen anything like it.
    At one of our officers meetings we decided that we needed to have a major outreach rally of some sort. It was decided to hold a rally on May 25,1970 in the school Cafeteria. We sent out letters to as many churches as we could and asked them to pray for us and come and be a part of this rally if they could. We asked a local minister, Dennis Stevenson to be or speaker. The Lord also opened an unexpected door for us. The Danny Belle Singers, a well known black gospel women's group supplied the evening with a full concert. We couldn't believe what was happening. The rally was given the name, "Follow The Son". 
     We only had one person come forward that night to receive Christ.....it was the president of the Catholic Club from Chabot Jr. College. It was worth all the effort and time to see God's hand work.
     
     
     The following year New Lifes' attendance when over one hundred students meeting on campus every Tuesday and Thursday. A local newspaper ran a full front page story on this amazing Bible study group.
     To top it all  off, this Bible study group held prayer meetings every other Friday evening at Spencer Mortuary in Castro Valley. Yep, that's right a mortuary. We didn't try to raise the dead, we just prayed for each other and "snatched" the lost from the gates of hell.
     I've been in a true revival! I know that God does work. Many times in spite of ourselves. I also know from this experience that at times, although they do have their place, denominations can be a great hindrance to reaching the lost for Christ. The students that made up New Life represented denominations that included Baptists, Southern Baptists, Pentecostal, Four Square, Conservative Baptist, Seventh Day Adventists, Catholics, Community churches and others. It didn't make any difference as long as the person professed Jesus Christ as their  Lord and Saviour. A number of these same people went on to be come full time ministers or missionaries. They have literally  gone out to different parts of the world to serve Christ. They weren't convinced by a preacher, they were moved by the power of God through the Holy Spirit! 
     For the summer of 1970  I went back to the Maytag warehouse that I had worked in the previous summer. The truck drivers were just as foul as ever and still made fun of me for reading my Bible at lunch. It didn't really bother me all that much. I just couldn't see how any of these hard nosed characters could ever find Christ with the attitudes they had. It would take a miracle.

- Pop -

     I was just about to walk out the door to go to church, when the phone rang. It was some one from the Pacific States Steel where my dad worked. There had been an accident. The first report said that the overhead crane that my dad was running had slammed into the end of the building and Pop had been injured. He had been taken to the hospital and we were told we should get there as soon as possible.
     I picked up my mother from church (She had left the house before I did that morning.) and we went to the hospital. There we found out that my dad had suffered a stroke and needed immediate surgery. It was about five hours or more before the doctor came out and told us that Pop had a blood vessel break in the right side of his brain due to an aneurysm. He would have to have surgery again in order to repair the vein that had ruptured. This time they went in and wrapped the vein with muscle hoping it would cause the vein to stop bleeding and eventually heal up. It didn't work. They operated a third time and spliced the damaged vein and surgically sewed it together. This worked. However, in the process of mending the first vein, they had found a second vein with an aneurysm that was just as bad as the first and needed immediate attention. This would be the fourth brain operation on my dad within a six week period. He had also had an abdominal exploratory surgery because of severe pains in his lower abdomen. They found nothing.
     
     
     Pop finally started to get better, but he would be partially paralyzed on his left side for the rest of his life. He often mentioned that he wished they had just installed a "locking gas cap" in his head instead of doing all that cutting. I can't blame him. The pain that I watched him endure tore me apart. 
     For my third and fourth years of College I went to California University, Hayward. I majored in speech communications. While there I became the president of the Cal State Christian Fellowship. It later changed its name to The Light Company. I got to speak at lunch time rallies as well as organize a book table once or twice a week. This was not as active as New Life, but we still witnessed to people as much as possible.
     What makes Cal State Hayward a significant part of my Christian life is that I was able to write most of my papers on either Biblical subjects or on prominent Christians. A short list of these papers would include; The Rhetoric of Jesus Christ, Problems In Presenting The Gospel, How Do You Explain Billy Graham?, The Speaking Style of Dave Wilkerson. There was one speech class that I was in where twelve out the fourteen students enrolled were Christians. The teacher Dr. Baird, was also a Christian and had written the book for the class entitled, "Preparing For Platform and Pulpit". We all did most of our speeches (more like sermons) and papers on the Bible or Biblically related subjects. We had a blast! 
     By November of 1970 my father had recovered enough to come home. He was still partially paralyzed on the left side and would never regain full use of his hand or leg. It was hard for me to see him in this condition. He had been a strong powerful man that could work tirelessly for hours with little or no breaks. Large or difficult projects didn't scare him. He simply took them on a little bit at a time until the job was done. But now, a man who had survived the bombing of Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7th, 1941 and the rest of World War II ; and had worked in a hot dirty steel mill for twenty seven years to support his family, could only walk with the help of a cane as his left arm hung limp at his side. But he was still my Pop and I loved him deeply.
     In January of 1971, I was given a job opportunity that would help me pay the rest of my way through college. Since my dad was back home and seemed to be doing okay, I took the job. I would come back home once in a while to help keep things up around the house. They needed the help and I didn't mind doing it. So, I went to work and live at Spencer Mortuary in Castro Valley, California. The same mortuary that New Life held prayer meetings every other Friday night.
     For the year and a half that I was there, I learned more about death and grieving then I have time to explain in this paper. Rev. Jess Spencer, who ran the mortuary, was a tremendous help in understanding the best way to approach a person who had lost a loved one. It was also a period of time in my life where I saw how important it was to reach others for Christ before death robbed them of the opportunity to find Him as Saviour. Death is not a respecter of person, place, age, time or religious convictions. When it comes, it is like having a freight train go through the middle of your house and park in your living room. It refuses to be ignored! In the time I was there I picked up around two hundred people who had died. Everything from a five year old little girl to a one hundred and four year old women, and all ages in between. Death is not pretty, and it can be blamed on Satan and sin.  
     
     It must have been the winter of 1971 or late spring when I found myself wanting to go back to the Maytag warehouse just to see how things were going. When I walked into the office I was told that several of the truck drivers had found Christ. I couldn't believe it. These foul mouthed, crude dudes? As I was standing there one the truck drivers who had been a former Junior Mr. America came in, looked me straight in the eye and said, "When you get done in here I want to see you outside!" The way he said it made me think he was going to chew me out for something. When I went out he turned to me and explained that he had accepted Christ several months back. He also told me that he wanted to apologize for all the foul and cruel things he had said to me about my belief in Christ and reading my Bible at lunch and much more. He asked me to forgive him and was pleased to do so. His name is Jim. I also met the two others that had accepted Christ. One had come close to committing suicide before finding Christ. But now all three were saved by the blood the Lamb of God. The miracle that I thought could never happen; had happened!
     I went away praising God that day for two reasons. First, they had all told me that I had made a great difference in each of their lives because I didn't let their intimidations bother me. I had stood for Christ as best I could each day. Next, I praised God because I learned an important lesson about how God works. When a Christian stands firm for Christ in the middle of  unbelievers, but doesn't see results right away, it doesn't mean that His work is done. At times God will allow the Christian to be taken out of the picture in order to create a void in the lives of the people he or she worked with so they can see their own need for Christ more clearly. Sounds strange but it's true. I have seen this on several occasions.
   
- The Holy Lands -

     After I graduated for Cal State, Hayward, with a degree in Speech, my parents gave me the money so I could take a tour of the Holy Lands with Biola College in southern California. This was not a small gift. My parents weren't rich and my father's illness had made things hard for them. They insisted that I take it because I had paid my own way through four years college and that had helped them out a great deal.
     So, in June of 1972 I had the privilege of traveling with Dr. Lloyd T. Anderson and Dr. Curtis Mitchell and about fifty other travelers through the cities and countries of the Bible. The trip included: Italy - Rome, the Catacombs, the Palace of Nero and more; Greece - Mt. Olympus, Corinth; Egypt - Cairo, Thebes, Valley of the Kings and Queens, the Great Pyramid; Israel - Jerusalem, the Dead Sea, Qumran, Sea of Galilee and cities around the Sea of Galilee; Turkey - Izmir, Ephesis, other Biblical sites; Austria - Vienna.
     The trip was worth three years in any Bible college. To walk where Jesus walked and to see first hand the places mentioned in Scripture, provided me with a foundation of the reality and truth of the Bible that cannot be equaled.





- Mack Trucks -

     When I returned from my Holy Land tour, in early July, I found a job building Mack Trucks in a local assembly plant. It was good work with the usual rough, foul mouthed men I had encountered in other jobs. It didn't bother me to be around them. I actually enjoyed the challenge of trying to find ways of getting a little bit of Jesus into their systems. After I had tried a number of ways I thought I'd try something different. I started humming "Onward Christian Soldiers" and "Amazing Grace" while I worked. One man picked up on what I was doing and started poking fun by singing, "Onward Christian Boyscouts. . .etc.". He also referred to John 3:16 as "John who lives in room 316." I wasn't sure that what I was doing was getting anywhere until I heard him humming "Onward Christian Soldiers" to himself. He was also humming "Amazing Grace"! The Holy Spirit had caused the songs to stick.
     I don't know what happened to this man, because I left for Bible College after being at Mack for a little over a year. I wonder if he's still humming those songs?

- Mrs. "T", Packets and Moody -

    Gay Colleen Thompson is her name, and I met her at Chabot College at the end of October in 1969. I didn't know it then, but her mother was going to teach me few things about suffering that I knew nothing about!
     I know I'll never forget the day that I offered to take this 4'11" blond to her house after school one day. I don't remember why, but I was feeling depressed and sorry for myself when I drove her home. Gay asked if I wanted to come in and meet her mom. I said yes and away we went. When we entered, I looked to my left only to see a contraption that was about three feet in diameter with a mirror attached at the top. In the mirror I saw the face of a women, who smiled and said, "Hi there". It was Gay's mother. She was an Iron Lung patient. I suddenly felt very much embarrassed for feeling sorry for myself. My problems were nothing compared to what I saw before me.  
     I learned that Mrs. Thompson had contracted polio in the early 1950's. Gay was about 2-1/2 at the time and remembered her mother being in the hospital. Gay's dad, Fred Thompson, had started to build his wife a house in the hills of San Leandro, California. They had found out that Mrs. Thompson would be confined to the iron lung as long as she lived. Gay's dad was determined to bring his wife home and care for her  
himself. In the process of building the house however, he was badly injured when a small tractor rolled over on top of him. He went to be his Lord about three weeks later. Gay was five years old.
     By the time I first met Mrs. Thompson she had been confined to the iron lung for about seventeen years, unable to move anything below her neck by herself. She was not able to get out of the iron lung without a special breathing device, because she had zero lung capacity on her own. Gay, her oldest sister Marie, a wonderful black lady named Juanita, and Gay's grandmother Mrs. Mongold supplied 24 hour care for Mrs. Thompson.
     


     I'm afraid, when I came along, I made things more difficult for them. Two years after I met Gay, I asked her to marry me. She said yes, but with reservations. She was not about to leave her mother or sister or grandmother so she could just get married and leave. If we were to be married, it had to be in such a way that her mother was taken care of too. This was not going to be easy!
     For the next several years we prayed about the situation and what God would have us do. Some people, even Christians, suggested that we put Mrs. T. in a convalescent care hospital. They argued that we should do this because Mrs. T.'s condition was destroying our lives and Gay's sister's life as well. Gay would have none of it. As much as I wanted to marry Gay, I couldn't agree to putting Mrs. T. in a home either. We had to find another way.
     Finally, I thought I might have come up with an idea that could work. I approached Mrs. Thompson with the idea wondering if she was willing to try something that rather drastic. I sat next to her so she could see me without looking in the mirror. I said,"Mrs. Thompson, I'm not sure how were going to solve this problem. The only thing I can think of is to build a bedroom with a bath onto that small apartment that's upstairs." She turned, looked me straight in the eye and said, "Do it!" There was no question that this was the answer. The only problem was that we only had about $1500 in a saving account and I was leaving to go to Moody Bible Institute in August of that year. If all this was going to happen, God would have to show us how. It was now the summer of 1973 and by the end of August I would be in Chicago.

- Packets -

     As I look back on it, the summer of 1973 was sure a busy one. Working at Mack Trucks, getting ready to go Moody Bible institute in August, planning and building an addition to my future mother-in-laws house, preparing for marriage the next summer. What else could come up? How about a small project? Nothing complicated. Just  canvas the entire city of Castro Valley, California. Okay, sure why not?
     The church that Gay and I now attended, Redwood Chapel, had asked me to be in charge of developing a program to distribute an informational packet to each home in the Castro Valley area. I agreed to head up the project. The plan I came up with took a few people by surprise. I told them that we could complete the project in one day. Two at the most. At first some people thought I was nuts or over zealous, seeing that there were about 15,000 homes to be reached. However, I showed them that if we could get a minimum of 100 people to show up on just one Saturday, then each person would only have to get packets to 150 homes. With a church that had an attendance of over 800 people per service, this shouldn't be too hard.
     On one Saturday in late July we had over 100 people volunteer to distribute the packets. I had divided up the city into manageable sections and had put one person in charge of a group of ten workers. We had runners (with cars) to take supplies to the various groups if  they ran out packets or needed help. We also had people manning phones to answer questions as people called the church for more information. When the       

workers  came back at noon (the church supplied lunch) we kept track of what areas had been completed on an overhead projector. By noon time, over half of the city had been canvased. By the end of the day approximately three quarters were completed. We had not made our goal of covering the whole city, but on that one day we had distributed close to 11,250 packets. The job was completed on one additional Saturday in August. 15,000 had been contacted in two days. By this time, I was already at Moody Bible Institute in Chicago, Illinois.

- Moody -

     There were many things about being at Moody Bible Institute that are worth recalling, but there are three that stand out in my mind as being truly memorable. One is the tremendous privilege of being able to spend so much quality time in God's word and have such fine teachers with which to discuss the Scriptures. Fifteen units of Bible each semester, thirty units of Bible in one year was a definite challenge, but it was also a great blessing.
     At Moody each person is given a Christian Work Assignment (C.W.A. for short) which involved some sort of "on the job training". This could be at a church teaching a Sunday School class, helping at a home for unwed mothers, or going to a rescue mission once a week to sing or preach at one of their services. My first assignment was at the Harbor Light Mission. It was considered one of the hardest missions in the Chicago area. It was not uncommon for the mission workers to find as many as three dead drunks on their doorstep per week. Trying to preach to a room full of live drunks is not easy either. They have their own ideas about what the Apostle Paul said and it ain't pretty at times. It was a rough place, but it was a true picture of the real world filled with sin.
     It wasn't long before I found myself short of funds. Living on your own in a big city is expensive. There was a position being offered by a United Methodist Church in the River Forest area for a part time youth minister. I applied for the job and was accepted in about October of 1973. The school allowed me to use this as my C.W. assignment for the remainder of the school year. The position also paid $200 a month which I badly needed. I didn't know anything about the Methodists when I started the job, but realized later that I was in the middle of a mission field inside the walls of a church. Before I left the Church at the end of the school year, I had the privilege of leading almost all the high school students at the church to a saving knowledge of Christ (about six students). I had also had the opportunity to speak at a youth "lock in" where twelve students accepted Christ. It seemed a strange place to find a mission field.
     Probably the activity I did most was to hand out tracts in the streets of Chicago. It was an interesting challenge. Once, when my room mate (Robert Stretch) and I were handing out tracts I saw a lady standing in a door way. I went over and handed her a tract. I saw several other ladies sitting inside in what looked like some kind of waiting room. I went in and gave a tract to each one and then went back out the door. I found Bob a little way up the street and when I got to him he asked, "Do you have any idea what kind of place you were in?" "I'm not sure", I answered. When I turned to look, there was a sign above the door that read "Rosies". Bob laughed and said, "It's a little house of ill repute". We both 

got a good laugh out of it and reasoned away my error by proclaiming that, "They needed Christ too". So much for the streets of Chicago.
     I had completed the Advanced Studies Program at Moody and received a Certificate in Bible. It was a hard course, but it was well worth the time and effort. Now all I wanted to do was go home to be with Gay. I also wanted to see what had become of our little building project.    
     I returned to California in May of 1974 to find a beautiful little apartment on the back side of  the second floor of the Thompson home. What puzzled me was how we could still have about five hundred dollars left in our savings! It was Mrs. T. again. She had written letters to people she knew around the world (literally) and told them one of daughters was getting married and that we were building the addition in order to help care for her after we were married. People responded by sending donations to the building project. It was incredible!
     After being engaged for three years, Gay and I were married on July 20th, 1974 and  yes, Mrs. Thompson was at our wedding. Iron Lung and all. We lived in the little apartment for about one year. Then, in spring of 1975 Mrs. Thompson went to be with her husband and with her Lord Jesus Christ in Heaven. She walked into heaven that day completely healed of her infirmities. Praise God for a invalid mother-in-law who understood how to put into practice her faith in God's ability to get things done!

- The First Five years -

     For the first year and a half that Gay and I were married, I only had about four months of paying work. I was trying to get into the ministry as a youth minister, but found that this wasn't going to be as simple as I thought. So, I took on an odd job once in a while and kept trying to find where God wanted me to be.
     During this same time, we found that people were amazed that we had gone to such lengths to care for Gay' mother. They found it hard to believe that we had deliberately delayed getting married for three years in order to build an addition where we could live and Gay could still take care of her mom. When they found out that there was an intercom between the apartment and the downstairs so Gay's sister could call her at any time, they were even more surprised. This was something that most people would never do. Most people would have broken off the engagement completely, or had the invalid mother put into a home. We believed,(and still do) that it was our Scriptural responsibility before God to care for Mrs. Thompson, and in so doing we were obeying his command to honor our parents, which includes their later years. We know now that by doing this, God has blessed us for being obedient to His word.
     After Mrs. Thompson passed away in the spring of 1975, things started to change. We took a summer job, together, at Sequoia Lake Y.M.C.A.. Unfortunately, the camp had been poorly managed and by the middle of the summer there wasn't enough money to keep us on staff. It was fun while it lasted! I was a supervisor on a "slow learner" wood cutting crew.   We taught them how to sharpen chain saws and axes. Showed them how to  
make a firebreak by clearing away brush and downed trees. They did a great job and


 enjoyed being able to do something that gave them a sense of value. We also held Bible studies for staff members and other activities.
      In February of 1976 Gay and I were hired at Hume Lake Christian Camps. She was to be the camp nurse and was given a position in Accommodations with the assurance that I would later be put into Programming. Hume is a beautiful place in the high Sierra's at an elevation of about 5,400 ft. and 65 miles from civilization. I had been a camper there several times between 7th and 10th grades. 
     While there, we had the privilege of meeting and hearing some the best speakers in the United States and other countries. Such as J. Vernon Magee, Luis Pallau (known by many as the Billy Graham of South America), Ken Pore (who was the youth speaker all summer),and a host of the best gospel music groups in the country. 
     We also became friends with one of the original founders of Hume, Hermon Pettit. He was eighty two when we met him and had just finished writing his second book. A man of true faith, who had dedicated his life to intercessory prayer. He was asked one time if God had shown him how much longer he would live. He said "ten years". He went to be with Jesus in the spring of 1986, he was 92 years old. 
     After being at Hume for close to one year we knew that we needed to move on. It is a beautiful place with a tremendous ministry, but for a young couple just starting their lives together, it was hard. The hours were long, anywhere from 12 - 16 hours a day with little or no rest, and very low pay. Between my wife and I we had a combined salary of $900 a month. Out of which was taken $150 for our housing, $2.00 for every meal we ate at the camp cafeteria (we were required to eat at least one meal a day with the rest of the staff. This amounted to a minimum of  $60 each per month or a total of $120 for the two of us.), and of course taxes were taken out. By the time everything was deducted, we only had about $550 per month between us. Out of this we still had to pay for our own medical expenses, food, auto insurance, gas, clothes and other expenses.
     Aside from the money problems, Gay was still working through the loss of her mother the year before. It was hard for her to be so far away from her two sisters and friends in this isolated area. It was time to go back to East Bay of San Francisco and find work there.
     It didn't take long after we got back for Gay to find a job as a nurse in the Fremont area. I was told by a friend about a possible opening for a Youth Minister at a church in the city of Oakland. I applied and was called to the Oakland Evangelical Free Church as the Assistant Pastor in charge of youth ministry. I was ready to get started and  excited about the possibilities that were before me. Being able to teach young people the Bible and help them move closer to Christ was a dream come true. I was twenty seven years old, filled with energy and willing to do whatever was needed to complete the task. But I still had a lot to learn.
     I couldn't have been at the church for more than two days when the pastor told me that one of the boys in the youth group had died. He had been running around the perimeter of the school yard for his P.E. class when he collapsed. By the time they got him to the hospital by ambulance, he was already dead. I found out later that he had been 



diagnosed earlier with a heart problem but it had not been considered serious enough to worry about. 
     Obviously it was more serious then first thought. His name was David. He was thirteen years old. Again, the freight train of death had parked itself in the living room of another  unsuspecting victim. 
     After a while things started to settle back down and I was enjoying working with the kids and teaching them God's word. We did most of the things that youth groups do and had a great time. I even started a college group and eventually took them on a back packing trip in the Sierra's. 
     There were other responsibilities that I inherited as time went on. By the end of the first year I was responsible for: Jr. High, Sr. High, College and Career, Young Married, music, assist with visitation, evangelism (the I found It campaign) and more. It was getting to be more than one person could handle. The larger problem that I found out about after coming to the church was that the board was run by people who were all in the same family. George Oren, a successful business man, was on the board along with his wife, daughter and son-in-law. In essence, George ran the church. Even the senior pastor did not oppose George for fear of losing his job. It was not a good situation.
     Because of these circumstances along with being "burned out" from having too many responsibilities, I finally resigned. I was tired, burned out and deeply frustrated. I went to work for my brother-in-law in the construction industry. He owned his own company called Sonshine Construction. While I worked for him I was also trying to figure out what had gone wrong and why God would put me in a situation like the Oakland church. More importantly, I felt like I had failed God. I had backed off when the going got tough. At least that's the way I felt. It took me a long time to realize that I had entered the Oakland church expecting it to be filled with people who loved Christ and only wanted to do God's will. I found out the hard way, that sin is alive and well inside any church. My "rose colored glasses" had been removed by this experience. But I was still deeply wounded by all this and needed time to heal. My two and a half years with Sonshine Construction helped that healing process. 
     Gay and I went back to Redwood Chapel in Castro Valley, California where we had been members since the early 1970's. Although I was saddened and still hurting from my recent experience at the Oakland church, I still stayed involved with the ministry as a layman. I taught several adult Sunday School classes, mid week studies for adults and helped with home Bible studies. I was also asked to lead a Wednesday evening Bible study for singles. At time the church Christian Education Director asked if I would put together questions for the Adult Sunday School classes on the book of Matthew. It was a fun project.
     Music was the area that I turned to the most. Redwood Chapel had some of the best music people in the country. When first joined the choir, Joe Linn was the director. He was known for his composing and recording abilities as well as his personal talents with instruments of various kinds. About three years later, the church hired another music director to help with the massive amount of music the church was involved. He was 



medium height with short blond hair a pleasant smile and a way with music that can not be adequately explained in words. He seemed quite ordinary to me when I first met him, but after awhile I came to realize that this man had a unique gift from God. His name is Mr. Tom Fettke. 
      After being under his guidance for several years, I know I have become spoiled in the area of music. It is difficult at times to listen to groups that sing flat, or are not together in their pronunciation of words and other musical errors. The thing I miss the most hearing a choir that knows how to truly "worship" with music. More than once I looked at Tom's face from my place in the choir and he was in tears over the beauty of the worship that was being lifted up to God. In the music he has composed over the years, I can feel the worship that is in the music that he has written. The worship comes from within the man's soul. He is in tune with his God. It is a pleasure to be around such people.
     
- Fine Line - 

     Toward the end of 1980 the construction industry took a severe nose dive in the San Francisco Bay area and the rest of California as well. Because of it I found myself unemployed and wondering what to do. At the same time this happened, I had been studying Hebrews 11:1-6 on faith.  It's a good thing that I was because I was about to step out in faith in God like I had never done before. I was starting my own business doing Architectural Drafting and Designing. It was named Conley's Fine Line Drafting Service. 
     There were only two things standing in my way. First, it was the worst possible time to try and start a drafting business that was for architectural purposes. Construction was down and a large number of contractors were going out of business. Second, I had no idea what I was doing! The last architectural drafting that I had done was in high school in 1968. However, the one thing I had going for me is that I knew that this really was what God wanted me to do. So, from January 1st of 1981 until June of 1989, I designed, planned and drafted over 300 drawings. I even went back to my old Jr. College, Chabot, and got another A.A. degree in Architectural Drafting. God does work, but before He does, sometimes we have to get out of His way. Your's truly included! 
     More importantly, I used this business as a ministry. That was the primary reason it was started. I had applied at a number of churches while I was working with Sonshine Construction, but was always turned down for one reason or another. I finally accepted the possibility that God no longer wanted me to be a full time pastor in a church. I also became aware of the fact that there was a great need in our secular society for Christian business men. With this in mind, Conley's Fine Line Drafting Service was actually a ministry first and a drafting service second. I was able to enter both Christian and non-Christian homes and them with the design of their construction project. Many Christians were thankful for the Scriptural advice that I could offer them as well. In most of the plans that went out of Home based office, I placed a chart I had developed called "God's Plan of Salvation". It was John 3:16 combined with an in depth explanation of  what  it meant. 
     
     This little business helped me in a number of ways. It taught me how to deal with people of various backgrounds, there likes and dislikes. It taught me to lay aside my own ideas of what was good so others could express their own tastes.(Except when it conflicted with the planning dept. or the building codes.) The most important thing I learned out of this was that God can and does supply our needs when we stay in His will for our lives. I had ample evidence of this throughout the eight and a half years the business was in operation. Each week I would pray, asking God to supply a drafting job for the following week. Almost without fail there would be a job made available by the time the last one was finished. The jobs came from all over the Bay Area. This was truly amazing seeing that my only form of advertising was a small business card and prayer. But it worked, and that increased my faith in God's ability to do things that I thought impossible. My faith grew! 
     The first two years of my little business I earned a whopping $5,700 the first year and $6,700 the second. With Gay working part time as a nurse we were able to make all the "ends" meet so the bills were paid. However, in early 1982 we found out that Gay was pregnant and the baby was due sometime in late December. This would change everything!
     In late October I was becoming more concerned about our financial situation. I knew that the responsibility rested with me to find a way to increase our income. After all babies don't come cheap! (They don't come with coupon books or instruction manuals either!) The only way that I could increase my income was to increase my number of clients. There two ways of doing this. First, I could launch an advertising campaign or I could pray and tell God what I needed. I chose to pray. On October 29th I prayed and thanked God for how He had been supplying our needs for the past two years. I told Him (as if He didn't know already) that we had a child coming and that what I was making now was enough to meet the up coming needs. I thanked Him in advance for His supplying our needs. On November 5th I had five calls from people who needed drafting for upcoming additions. God had heard, and was answering in abundance.
     On January 4th, 1983 Jeremy was born. That same year my little business earned over $16,000. God knew our needs and met them. When Jeremy was born it was necessary for Gay to have a "cesarean section". The insurance only covered about half of the cost. We had to pay out of pocket about $1500. Later, when Jeremy was 4 months old, he had to have surgery  for two hernias in his lower abdomen. Again the insurance didn't cover the total cost of this surgery and we had to pay out close to $2000. It was God's increasing of my work load that kept us from going deep into debt.
     From November of 1982 until we left California and moved to Colorado in 1989, my earnings from this little business never dropped below $16,000 a year. God continued to supply in every area.







- Troubled Years -

     Between the years of 1986 and 1989 events came into my life that would  prove to be the worst experiences that I had ever encountered up to that time. Because they are a definite part of my life and walk with Christ it is impossible for me to keep them out of my personal testimony. Some of the things I am about tell started long before 1986.
     During my dads' long illness, we would go down to Santa Cruz, California to visit with my parents. They were always glad to see their grandson Jeremy and find out what new thing he could do or had gotten into. I was always careful to talk to my dad when he was outside in the front yard so I could find out how he was doing. Most of the time he was the same, but once in a while he would tell me about some things my mom had done to upset him. He needed to talk to somebody and I was it.
     On several occasions my dad told me that my mom had pushed his wheel chair into a wall and blamed him for the accident. Saying that he had been dragging his foot. He admitted that he was dragging his foot because she was heading straight for the wall! One time she even tried to hit him, but he was still strong enough to stop her. My sister confirmed this story at a later date. She too had heard the same thing. My mom would often get angry with my dad because he had a problem with bed wetting. This is not uncommon for older people who are on certain drugs after a severe illness. However, my mom was convinced that he was doing it on purpose. This simply was not true. I knew my dad better than that. He was not the type to deliberately wet his own bed. As a matter of fact, it was very embarrassing for him. 
     If I could have done it, I would have brought my dad home with me and let him live with Gay and I for the rest of his life. Unfortunately, this was not possible. My mom had power of Attorney over my dad and moving him would have cut off any financial support he was receiving. He stayed with my mom, putting up with her strange and at times, cruel ways.
         On January, 1987 my parents came up to Castro Valley for Jeremy's 4th birthday. My dad brought me a chess board that he had made when he was in high school. He said he wanted me to have it be cause he was afraid that my mom would throw it away or burn it after he died. I was glad to get it, and told him he would be around for a long time. He had fun with Jeremy sat on his lap and let Jeremy play with his cane. It was a pleasant day. They left that afternoon for Santa Cruz, about 65 miles away.
     The next day, January 5th, at about 11:30 a.m. I got a call from my mom, Pop had just had a heart attack and was being taken to the hospital. She would call back as soon as she knew how serious it was. About 12:45 called again and told that Pop was not going to live much longer. He was going to die at any time.
     I stopped what I was doing, made a few quick calls to my brother and sister and my wife, then headed for Santa Cruz. It was already 1:50 p.m. By the time I got there, at 3:10 p.m., he was already gone. It was the worst day of life. He went to be with Christ one day after my sons' birthday. We buried him on January 10th, my wifes' birthday. The holiday season has not been the same since.
     
     
     
     From early spring of 1986, when Hermon Pettit past away, to about April of 1989 there would be ten deaths. Four of them, including my dad, would be family members. One would be a close friend, Peter Ramos - died at age 29, who I had been discipling for some time. The rest were people I had worked with or had known for some time. It was a difficult time. I thought it might never end.
     February of 1988 was a month that caused me to seriously question if "death" would ever give me some space so I could get back to a reasonably normal way of life. On the 3rd, my aunt Mary passed away. The funeral was on the 9th. Then on February 24th, Pete Ramos passed away. The next day our neighbor across the street came over and told us that her friend, whom we had known, had committed suicide. He shot himself in the head. His name was George. Our neighbor went to Florida to attend the funeral for George, while we buried Pete on the 29th of February in California. Our neighbor had  also known Pete, but I chose to tell her about his death a week or so after she got back from Florida.  
     A few days into the month of March, Gay came home from work and asked me how my day had been. I told her that no one had died. I was serious. I was beginning to think that this thing called "death" would never leave my home. I was not a "happy camper".
     To add to the unspeakable grief that I was going through, the church we were attending was going through a nasty and angry "split". The senior pastor had stood before the congregation and confessed that  he had committed adultery (five years earlier) with one of the secretaries of the church. This news came on the heals of a large 5.5 million dollar building project that had got out of hand and was now a 7.5 million dollar project. The final price tag after obtaining a loan would be close to 15.0 million.
     It seemed as if everything around us was falling apart.

- Time To Move -

     For at least two or three years I had felt that Gay and I needed to get out of California. It was becoming over populated, violence was increasing at an alarming rate and the cost of living was getting way out of our reach. These were only a few of the many things that we considered. If anything, we wanted to "turn the clock back" a few years so our son could grow up in a better environment. At the same I did a lot of praying and soul searching to make sure I wasn't trying to run away from the "grief" I was slowly working my way through.
     We knew we needed to move, but we weren't sure where until my sister and her husband offered to let us live with them in Colorado for a year while I built us a house. That was all I needed to hear. Gay and I talked and prayed about it and believed it was where we should go.
     We put the house on the market in the spring of 1989 and within one week we had two offers. One was for the price we had asked and the other was for $1,500 more than the asking price. Of course we took the better offer. Escrow closed in mid June and on June 16, 1989 we left California and headed for Colorado. We took our time traveling with a loaded U-Haul truck, took in few sights and finally arrived in Boulder on June 21, 1989.


     It didn't take long for us to find an acre of land just north east of Boulder. It was close to an elementary school for Jeremy, not far from a shopping center and not far from the city of Boulder itself. We submitted plans to the county in December of 1989 and broke ground for the foundation in mid January 1990. We were excited about what God had done for us. More importantly, we knew He was One who had brought about these blessings.
     We had decided to build a log home. It has been one of my dreams for many years and now it was coming true. We built it ourselves with little outside help. It was hard heavy work, but it was an incredible thrill when it was finished. (Okay, so we still have some trim and flooring to finish. After you've built something this big, trim and flooring are nothing.) Because it was built out of logs I was constantly wondering how Noah had managed to build the Ark without any modern tools. My job was nothing compared to what he did.
     We have enjoyed Colorado immensely! The country is beautiful, the seasons are a wonderful change from the "non-seasons" we were used to in California and we even love the snow. It has given Jeremy a multitude of opportunities that he would never of had in the Bay Area. We give all the praise to God for His guidance and help in moving us to this place.
     During the seven years we have been here, we have been at three churches. The first one was where my sister and her husband attended. It was a small group of people who were more liberal than we wanted to be. Yet they still loved the Lord and preached the Gospel. We pray that the Lord will continue to guide them. 
     The second church was  Harvest Baptist which was close to where we were building our new home. It was a sound church with a wonderful group of people. I got involved with the choir and helped a little with some music. Unfortunately, their senior pastor resigned and went to either Washington or Oregon, (I've forgotten which one.) which left the church in an unstable period. I was not ready to deal with another problem in a church at that time. Mostly because of what I had just gone through back in California. I needed time to heal and a place where that could happen. So we moved to another church.
     We found Calvary Bible Evangelical Free Church. It was a denomination that I was familiar with and it was large enough that I could "lay low" for awhile and let some of my spiritual and emotional wounds heal. For about the first year that's what I did. After that, I slowly started getting back into ministering to others.
     In January of 1991, with the approval of the Youth minister and a deacon, we started a College / Career class. We had one person. For the next two years our class consisted of having no one show up, to having three young men come to the class. In the next few years we watched it grow to where there was as many as twelve to sixteen people in attendance. Two young men, (much to my surprise) who didn't want to be a part of this class, started a second College class. At first it bothered me, but later I accepted it as another area in the church that needed to be cared for. That class now  has an  attendance of fifty or more students each Sunday under the care of the present Youth Minister. The College / Career is still there too. It has twelve or more each week. We 


have had the pleasure of watching the whole area of College and College / Career grow, by the grace of God alone, from zero to over sixteen in the last six years. God does many things when we get out of His way.

- Conclusion -

     Some one reading this testimony might think that I have become a depressed and negative person. This would be understandable because of the difficulties  presented. However, it would not be a correct conclusion. The truth is that God has shown both my wife and I how to learn from the difficult experiences we have gone through. He has helped us to turn these situations into tools from which we can guide others as they face hard times. By going through these trials, we have come out on the "other side" knowing that God does provide for our needs, and our faith in Him has increased because of His faithfulness to us.
               " In this you greatly rejoice, even though now for a little while,
                  if necessary, you have been distressed by various trials, that
                  the proof of your faith, being more precious than gold which
                  is perishable, even though tested by fire, may be found to result
                  in praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ;"
                                                                                   I Peter 1:6,7
   
     In a discussion I had with Hermon Pettit (when we were at Hume Lake), he told me something that has helped during these times of trial. He said, "You know, there's a lot of people who come up here on the mountain (Hume) to try to grow closer to God and have fruit in their lives. But they don't seem to realize that fruit grows in the valleys, not on top of mountains." He is right! 
     In the last twenty years, or more, the trials we have gone through have caused me to dig deep into Scripture. This has enabled me to teach well over half of the New Testament books and a number of Old Testament books to people as God gave us the opportunity. It has also given me answers to difficult questions or situations that we face each day. Because Gay and I have gone through many deep valleys together. I believe that the Lord has given us a great harvest of spiritual fruit. We will share it with those around us as He opens the doors to ministry. 


      
     

     
     





