- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley

Scriptural Concepts Related to Marriage
#1
-  Promises -

"Guard your steps as you go to the house of God,
and draw near to listen rather than to offer the sacrifice of fools;
for they do not know they are doing evil.
Do not be hasty in word or impulsive in thought to bring up a matter in the presence of God.
For God is in heaven and you are on earth; therefore let your words be few.
For the dream comes through much effort, and the voice of a fool through many words.
When you make a vow to God, do not be late in paying it,
for He takes no delight in fools.
Pay what you vow!
It is better that you should not vow than that you should vow and not pay.
Do not let your speech cause you to sin
 and do not say in the presence of the messenger of God that
it was a mistake.
Why should God be angry on account of your voice
and destroy the work of your hands?
(Ecclesiastes 5: 1-6, NASB)

    A 'vow', a 'promise'; they are the same. When a man and woman promise themselves to each other as husband and wife; the promise is made before God even if they do not believe He is real! The reason this is true is because marriage was created, blessed and ordained by God. (see: Gen.2: 20-25)
    It is important to understand that 'breaking', or trying to 'back out' of our promises to God will bring about severe consequences. God will; "...destroy the work of your hands." This can be easily verified by simply recalling what has happened to people you know (or have heard of) that have gone through a divorce. Whatever they had worked to obtain, is destroyed in the process of  tearing apart the marriage they had promised God they would keep; '...until death do we part'.
    This brings us to another word that has gotten lost in our current understanding of love and marriage, and that is 'commitment'. It is easy to be 'in love' when everything is going along fine and the emotions associated with love are evident; but when that road gets a bit bumpy and that 'feelings of love'  is not as it use to be; it is your commitment (promise, vow) that will bring you through. Love is not just a feeling, it is a 'mind set'. In other words, don't let your love be controlled by the situations around you, or how you feel, because they will change constantly.(Sometimes even by what you ate or didn't eat for breakfast!) The stability of any marriage depends on both husband and wife keeping their focus on Christ and practicing 'agape' love (Looking for God's best for each other.) in every aspect of their relationship. Love is a commitment, a promise, a vow, not  just a feeling!
    Finally, I have a little assignment for you. Read the book of Ecclesiastes several times in the next few weeks. I know this sounds a little odd, but the reason for this is to remind you of how futile this world is without God and Christ in control of your lives. Also, there are several positive things in the midst of the 'vanity' and 'chasing after the wind' that I want you to find. Do this together and be nice to each other and no fighting! 


- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley

Scriptural Concepts Related to Marriage
#2
-  Truth -

"Do not let kindness and truth leave you; Bind them around your neck,
Write them on the tablet of your heart,
So you will find favor and good repute in the sight of God and man."
(Proverbs 3:3&4)
"Have I not written to you excellent things of counsels and knowledge,
To make you know the certainty of the words of truth
That you may correctly answer to him who sent you?"
(Proverbs 22: 20 &21)
"Buy the truth, and do not sell it,
Get wisdom and instruction and understanding."
(Proverbs 23:23)
"Jesus therefore was saying to those Jews who had believed Him,
'If you abide in My word, then you are truly disciples of Mine;
and you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.'"
(John 8:31&32)
(all quotes from NASB)

    In discussing 'truth' I often refer to Proverbs 23:23 because it says to "Buy the truth, and do not sell 
it,...". This brings up an interesting question. If we can 'buy truth' , then what do we need in 'exchange' in order to purchase truth? In other words, how do we 'pay ' for it? No amount of money can buy real truth. Jesus Christ is the one and only Truth, but here we are looking for 'truth' as we deal with everyday life.
    The answer is simple yet profound. The only way we can 'buy truth', is to pay for it by giving up 'lies'! 
Think of it this way. Satan is the father of lies and sin. Jesus Christ is 'the Way, the Truth and the Life'. If you want the Truth that Christ gives us, you have to give up the lies of Satan. There are no 'half way' measures in this either, you can't have them both. Lies hide the truth, while truth exposes the lies.
    Also, love and truth walk hand in hand with each other. If you lie to the one you say you love, then you do not truly love them. Your love becomes a lie. Think about it!
    I learned this some years ago when I was about six or seven years old. I was a walking, breathing, talking liar. I was living proof that God was right when He told Noah that; "...the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth;...", and I had been caught in a whopper of a lie! (see: Gen 8:21)
    I can still see myself sitting on my sister's bed waiting for my dad to come in and give a spanking I would never forget. But when he came back into the room, he knelt down and looked at me eye to eye and said; "You have to stop all this lying. Do you know that when you lie to me, you are telling me that you don't love me..." I was horrified! I loved my dad very much and the thought that I had done something that made him think I didn't love him broke my young heart into pieces. I was in tears. I promised him I would never lie to him again. I hugged him and he hugged me. It was over, but it was a day that changed me forever. Lies hurt people, deeply, very deeply!
    


    
    I can't say that I never told a lie after that, because that would be a lie, but I can truthfully say that I  do every thing I can to be sure that my words are said in truth; and I have learned to hate lies.
   If you love your spouse or future spouse, don't lie to them. Buy the Truth, and do not sell it! Ever!      

    Here's  a little research study for you. Look up the various families in the book of Genesis and see how they handled telling the truth and lying. Remember, lying has many faces, such as scheming, manipulation, half truths and more. 
    Try these for starters: Cain and Able (chapt. 4), Noah and his sons (chapt. 9:18-27), Abram and Sarah (chapt. 12:10-20; 16:1- chapt. 23:20), Isaac and Rebekah (chapt. 25: 19- chapt. 33:20). Many of these you can read quickly and find the 'problem areas'. Most of them read like a day time soap opera without the T.V. screen! 
        
