- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley
       March, 15, 2009

- I think I lost the Rapture ?! -

     Ever since I started an in depth study of Revelation, I have been trying diligently and properly, to see how and where the 'rapture of the church' is dealt with in the book of Revelation. So far, I have found in chapter 6: 9-11; at the breaking of the fifth seal; "I saw underneath the alter the souls of those who had been put to death for proclaiming the Word of God, that is, for bearing witness." The second group, somewhat related to this first one, is in chapter 7: 9-17. This group is made up of a huge crowd, "too large for anyone to count, from every nation, tribe, people and language. They are described as; "These are the people who have come out of the Great Persecution. They have washed their robes and made them white with the blood of the Lamb. That is why they are before God's throne." (v.14-15)
     There are only two places that might be considered as a "rapture". The first is in chapter 20: 4&5 which describes this event as; the first resurrection.  "...I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for testifying about Yeshua and proclaiming the Word of God, also those who had not worshipped the beast or its image and had not received the mark on their foreheads and on their hands. They came to life and ruled with the Messiah for a thousand years. (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were over.) This is the first resurrection."
     The second mention of a "resurrection" is also in chapter 20: 11-15. This is what we call, "The Great White Throne Judgment". There is no mention of a 'resurrection', but this description; v.13 "The sea gave up the dead in it; and Death and Sheol gave up the dead in them; and they were judged, each according to what they had done. Then Death and Sheol were hurled into the lake of fire. This is the second death -- the lake of fire. Anyone whose name was not found written in the Book of Life was hurled into the lake of fire."
     Other than the two references above, there is no other mention of  a resurrection or 'rapture' within the book of Revelation. However, the fact that these two passages are in Revelation does raise a few questions. Such as; where and when did all the people come from who were; 1) "under the throne of God", that were martyred for proclaiming  the word of God? (chapter 6: 9-11) 2) "the untold number of people that could not be numbered who stood before the throne of God?" (chapter 7: 9-17) and 3), those who; "...came to life and ruled with the Messiah for a thousand years."? (chapter 20: 4&5) 
     There may be only one reasonable answer. They must have come at a time long before the actual events occurred  in Revelation. How much time is not known, and there is little or nothing in the book of Revelation that would shed any light on this issue. But we are not out of the game yet! There are other places in the Bible that address this question, and that is where we will continue the search. With care and caution!
     When attempting to understand God's Word concerning any issue we need to be sure we are not leaving out 
