M.C.:    Good evening Ladies and Gentlemen, and welcome to the fourth annual Christmas 
              Readers Theater presentation. This evenings presentation is entitled; The Birth of Jesus  
              The Messiah (with "eyewitnesses") I have been told that all of our 'eyewitnesses' are quite
              unique and have insights that have never been heard by mankind. (We'll have to wait and 
              see about this claim.) I have also been informed that one of our guests will be giving us the 
              most "tasteful" presentation you have ever heard. Unfortunately I don't have a clue as to 
              what that means, so  we will find out together as the evening progresses. 
                  Well, it seems that our guests have wandered off back stage, or some of them have not 
              yet arrived. So, while we are waiting for our staff to "round them up",as we say out here in 
              the real West, I think it would be a good idea if the appropriate person would read the first    
              portion of Scripture for tonights presentation. 

Scripture Reader:    (NKJ) Matt.1:18-25  "... Now the birth of Jesus Christ was as follows: After 
               His mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with 
               child of the Holy Spirit. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not wanting to 
               make a public example, was minded to put her away secretly. But while he thought about 
               these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, "Joseph, 
               son of David, do not be afraid to take to you Mary your wife, for that which is conceived in 
               her is of the Holy Spirit. And she will bring forth a Son, and you shall call His name Jesus, 
               for He will save His people their sins."
                   So all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the 
               prophet, saying: "Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and bear a Son, and they shall call 
               His name Immanuel," which is translated, "God with us."
                   Then Joseph, being aroused from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord commanded him 
               and took to him his wife, and did not know her till she had brought forth her first born 
               Son. And he called His name Jesus."
               2:1; Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of .....(interrupted by ?)

Asa ( a Donkey):  Hay wait just a cotton picken minute! you're mov'in too fast! You're missin' a 
               whole lot of good stuff!

M.C.:   Who are you? 

Asa:      I'm Asa, one of your special guests.

M.C.:   But, but you're a (pause) ... Donkey!

Asa:      Yep! right down to the end of my stubborn tail. But, not just any donkey! I'm the 
              donkey that carried my master's wife to Bethlehem, and believe you me it was no soft 
              job gettin' from Nazareth all the way to Bethlehem with the Mrs. ready to give birth. Do 
              you have any idea how far Bethlehem is from Nazareth?

M.C.:    Well, I think it's about 65 to 70 miles. 

Asa:      No! It's more like six or seven days walking distance. It seems even longer when you're  
              carrying some one on your back.
M.C.:    Ah, O.K., (slowly spoken, not quite sure) I guess I've just never thought of it in that way.


Asa:      But that's not what I wanted to tell you folks about. What I want to tell you is this; my 
              master Joseph, was the best master any donkey could ever have. He treated all of his
              animals with kindness and made sure we had plenty to eat and a place to sleep that was 
              out of the bad weather.  More than that, he made sure I didn't get over worked on the trip 
              down to Bethlehem. Several times I got really tired and he would stop, help his wife off 
              my back and give me some food and water and a few hours to rest up. Other masters 
              would whip their donkeys if they got tired, but not Joseph. I remember him quoting 
              something like "A righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the 
              wicked are cruel." He said it came out of the book of wisdom, whatever that is!
              Mrs. Master (I called her that when she wasn't lookin'. I don't think she minded.) was the  
              kindest lady I ever knew. Even though she was within a few days of giving birth, she would 
              take the time to brush me down after a long days travel. It was a pleasure and an honor to 
              carry her all the way to Bethlehem. She was a great lady!
              Anyway, when we finally got to Bethlehem Joseph and his wife couldn't find any place to  
              stay, so they wound up some where outside of town where there was a cave in the side of a 
              hill where shepherds would keep their sheep.

M.C.: Who-o-a -; Asa! Now you're getting ahead of our story. (pause) 

Asa:      Oops, Sorry

M.C.: Don't worry, he'll be back later. 
              
Scripture reader:   (NKJ) Luke 2:1-7; "And it came to pass in those days that a decree went forth 
               out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be registered. This census first took 
               place while Quirinius was governing Syria. So all went to be registered, everyone to his 
               own city. Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the 
               city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and linage of David,
               to be registered with Mary, his betrothed wife, who was with child. So it was, that while 
               they were there, the days were completed for her to be delivered. And she brought forth 
               her firstborn Son, and wrapped Him in swaddling cloths, and laid Him in a manger, 
               because there was no room for them in the inn."

M.C.:     Asa, now you can proceed with the rest of your presentation.

Asa:       Well, It's like I was sayin', when we got to Betlehem it was so filled with people that there 
               wasn't room for all of them. By the time we found the stable, Joseph and the Mrs. were so 
               tired they fell fast asleep. I was out too! But it's like the passage that was just read says, 
               my master's wife didn't give birth until a few days later when "...the days were 
               completed". Now that was a night to remember! 

M.C.:    Well I'll be, he's right. It does say that! "...the days were completed for her to be 
              delivered." What do you know! A donkey that knows some Scripture!




Scripture Reader: (NKJ) Luke 2:8-14; " Now there were in the same country shepherds living out 
               in the fields, keeping watch over their flock by night. And behold, an angel of the Lord 
               stood before them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were greatly 
               afraid. Then the angel said to them, "do not be afraid, for behold, I bring you good 
               tidings of great joy which will be to all people. For there is born to you this day in the city 
               of David a Savior, who is Christ the Lord. And this will be the sign to you: You will find a 
               Babe wrapped in swaddling cloths, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the 
               angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying: 'Glory to God in the 
               highest, And on earth peace, goodwill toward men!'"

M.C.:      Our next eyewitness is supposed to be here, but I'm not sure that this name is correctly 
                spelled. It's (spelling it out slowly) "B , a , a, a, b , s" that doesn't make any sense!

Baaabs:  Yes it does. That's my name; 'Baaabs' is a very common name in our flock, but it's said   
                with more of a bleating sound.

M.C.:      Oh, I beg your pardon. You are a sheep?

Baaabs: Correct on both counts. I am a sheep, and I am a 'ewe'.

M.C.:     Thats silly. You, can't be me.

Baaabs:  (giggling softly)You could if you were a female sheep! 

M.C.:     (looking abit puzzled, then gets the joke) Oh my, that was a good one! I like it! But please, we 
                would really like you to give us your eyewitness account of what you (that's Y-O-U) saw 
                the night the Angels came to the shepherds camp where you were staying. 

Baaabs:  That was a night I will never forget as long as I live! The three shepherds that were 
                watching us that night had taken us several miles from Bethlehem where the grass was as 
                lush as could be, (starting to fall into a 'day dream' mode) and the spring water  ran down 
                the stream to a place where it gently flowed into a calm spot where it was easy to drink 
                without getting hurt. It was wonderful! (Coming out of her dream)
                Anyway! After it was dark I  wandered a short distance away from the shepherds where I  
                had seen some soft green grass and layed down for the night. I don't know how long I had 
                been asleep when I heard the shepherds crying out like they were going to be killed or 
                something. I looked up and saw this bright, beautiful, soft light all around the  field that 
                was coming from the angel that stood in front of the shepherds. The angel spoke of a 
                child being born in Bethlehem, he told the shepherds to go find the baby and then the sky 
                was filled with angels that glowed with the same light as the first angel, so much that it 
                was almost as bright as day. It was incredible!
                And that's when  I met Nimrod!

M.C.:      Nimrod!? ... Who's Nimrod?
                


Nimrod:  (loud wolf howl, growl and snarling) I'm Nimrod! (with authority!)All you hunters and   
                 ranchers stay put, and don't get excited! I'm not here to cause any trouble.

M.C.:      You're a Wolf!  You're not in this program. There's nothing in the Christmas story 
                that talks about a wolf, (studdering) s,s,s so you need to g,get out of here immediately!
                you mangy, flea infested, killer.

Baaabs:  Hey, be nice to him, he's my friend! Besides that , he's your "extraordinary character who 
                has a most 'tasty' presentation for your listening pleasure.

Nimrod:  That's right, I'm your special guest, but don't worry I won't be here long. I'll tell you 
                what happened the night Baaabs and I met then I'll be on my way. Besides, I can smell all 
                you hunters and ranchers  in this room and it makes me nervous. Some of you women 
                have the same smell. Just don't make any sudden moves. Now, I'll tell you what happened   
                that night.
                    It was the way Baaabs told you just a minute ago, but what she didn't know at 
                the time is that I was hidin' in the brush just behind her... gettin' ready to "take her out 
                for dinner", if you get my drift. It took me awhile to sneak up behind her and get myself
                lined up to make the perfect jump that would have landed me right on the middle of her 
                back. She would have been dead if it hadn't of been for that bright light, and all those 
                angels flyin' around. Just as I jumped, the light from the angel blinded me and somehow  
                I landed on the grass right next to Baaabs. I couldn't take my eyes off that angel. It made 
                me feel so calm and peaceful that I forgot about having 'lamb' for dinner and started 
                munchin' on the grass. I'm not sure what did it, but Baaabs is now my friend and I could 
                never harm her. You heard right! Me,...Nimrod, the mighty hunter! Who's best friend is a 
                soft fluffy sheep.
                    For awhile after that night all I could eat was grass. I'm back to normal now, but I still 
                can't bring myself to kill anything bigger then a fox. (nervously) I got to get out of here, 
                my fur is starting to stand up on end like there might be some one after me.

M.C.:      But wait,wait... don't go yet..(flustered) Oh phooey! He's gone. I wanted to ask him what 
                the other wolves thought of him having a sheep for a friend.

Nimrod: (sounding far away) Are.... you.... crazy? I ...would... never...tell...them!

Scripture Reader: Luke 2:15-20; "...So it was, when the angels had gone away from them into 
                 heaven, that the shepherds said to one another, 'Let us now go to Bethlehem and see this 
                 thing that has come to pass, which the Lord has made known to us.' And they came with 
                 haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the Babe lying in a manger. Now when they had 
                 seen Him, they made widely known the saying which was told concerning this Child. And 
                 all those who heard it marveled at those things which were told them by the shepherds. 
                 But Mary kept all these things and pondered them in her heart. Then the shepherds 
                 returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard and seen, as it 
                 was told them."
Baaabs: Those shepherds were gone for a long time. They didn't come back until the afternoon of 
               the next day. They were sure happy! All of us were happy, including Nimrod. 

M.C.:     (flustered a bunch!) Ladies and gentlemen, I must confess to you all that I have been 
               completely unprepared for all these 'animals' that have come here tonight. I hope after our 
               Scripture reading, that our next guest will be something a little more "people like". But 
               I'm not so sure that the odds are going to be in my favor!

Scripture Reader: Matt. 2: 1-12; " Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of 
               Herod the king, behold, wise men from the East came to Jerusalem, saying, 'Where is He 
               who has been born King of the Jews? For we have seen His star in the East and have come 
               to worship Him.' When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem 
               with him. And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people 
               together, he inquired of them where the Christ was to be born. So they said to him, 'In 
               Bethlehem of Judea, for thus it is written by the prophet:
'But you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judea,
Are not the least among the rulers of Judah;
For out of you shall come a Ruler
Who will shepherd my people Isreal.'
                Then Herod, when he had secretly called the wise men, determined what time the star 
                appeared. And he sent them to Bethlehem and siad, 'Go and search carefully for the 
                young Child, and when you have found Him, bring back word to me, that I may come and 
                worship Him also.' When they had heard the king, they departed; and behold, the star 
                which they had seen in the East went before them, till it came and stood over where the 
                young Child was. When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
                And when they had come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary His mother, 
                and fell down and worshiped Him. And when they had opened their treasures, they 
                presented gifts to Him: gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Then, being devinely warned in a 
                dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed for their own country another 
                way."

M.C.:     There have been many debates concerning how many wise men, or magi, came to see the 
               Christ child, and from what country they came from. I am hoping that our next "eye 
               witness" can shed some light on this question. Also, (with confidence!) I have been 
               informed that our next guest is an expert on traveling in the desert, and his name is Sam 
               Dunes. He should be a very interesting person to talk to.

Dunes:   (Loud noises like a large donkey) Hi! I'm Samantha Dunes. Dunes for short.

M.C.:     Oh my word, I was right! another 'beasty'! 
Dunes:   Sorry to have to ruin your wonderful introduction 'deary', but I'm not a human, I'm a 
               Camel. To be more precise, I am a camel of the 'one hump' variety (called dromedary), 
               and , I am of the female persuasion. Don't feel too bad 'deary', you did get the part of me 
               being an expert on desert travel correct. As a matter of fact, we were designed to move fast 
               in the sand and be able to go for days without needing any water.

M.C.:     I do thank you for your gracious response. But now, could you please tell us about the wise 
               men or 'magi' that came to Bethlehem?

Dunes:   To tell you the truth,.....No. All I know is that the men who went looking for the Christ 
               child in Bethlehem were constantly looking at the stars, and their maps of the stars in 
               the night sky for guidance. Like the Scripture passage said, when they found the Child, 
               they worshiped Him, gave Him three gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh and went 
               home by a different way. The identity of the 'wise men', 'magi', or even 'kings' has been a 
               mystery for two thousand years and will probably stay a mystery for a long time. 
                   Oh wow! Look at the time. Sorry, but I've got to go. I'm entered in a camel race in 
               Virginia City, Nevada tomorrow, and if I don't leave now I'll miss it. Thanks for inviting 
               me it was fun. Hope you have a great Christmas and a Happy New Year.

M.C.:    I can't believe it. Our very last eyewitness has just run off the stage to go to the races! To 
              bad she didn't have any information as to who the wise men might have been. Oh well, at 
              least we learned that they have camel races in Virginia City, Nevada...whatever that's 
              worth! 
              This evening we have had some fun presenting The Birth of Jesus the Messiah through      
              the 'eyewitness' of some of the animals that are usually found in the Christmas 
              presentation. I think I can safely say that there were donkeys, sheep, camels and maybe 
              even a wolf (hiding somewhere) that may have been around during the time of Christ's 
              birth. However, God didn't leave the proof of sending His Son and His gift of Salvation 
              with the animals.
              Here's our Pastor to tell you of some people who were real eyewitnesses.


Closing remarks by; Pastor or appropriate person:

     
     Throughout Scripture God has carefully provided mankind with the reality of His plan of salvation through the Old Testament Prophets, the Apostles and the Written Word. We have the written accounts by Matthew and Luke and other, that tell of coming of Christ. We have true eye witness accounts of the life of our Lord Jesus Christ from men who gladly died for the truth of the reality of Jesus Christ.
     
In 2Peter 2:16 - 19, Peter writes; 
" For we did not follow cunningly devised fables when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of His majesty.
For He recieved from God the Father honor and glory when such a voice came to Him from the Excellent Glory: "This is My Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." And we heard this voice which came from heaven when we were with Him on the holy mountain. And so we have the prophetic word confirmed, which you do well to heed as a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts;"
     
     In 1 John 1:1-3 says; "That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, concerning the Word of life - the life was manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and declare to you that eternal life which was with the Father and was manifested to us - that which we have seen and heard we declare to you, that you also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ."
     
    It would take some time to read all the passages that speak of the eyewitness accounts, so we will end with two short verses from John 17: v.8 and v. 20.  
    They read: v.8 " For I have given to them the words which You have given Me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came forth from You; and they have believed that You sent Me." v.20 " I do not pray for these alone, (the Apostles) but also for those who will believe in Me through their word."

     The birth, life, death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, The Messiah, is a historical fact backed up by many eyewitnesses. This Christmas keep in mind that Our Lord Jeusu Christ, God is real and His Word is true.

     










'The Birth of Jesus the Messiah'
(with eyewitnesses)




A
production produced by:
Blue Collar Theology

for 
Readers Theater
written by

Dan Conley
12/2005



















Notes for Readers Theater participants:

1. The main theme of this presentation is; The reality of the of Jesus Christ, and the many 
    eyewitnesses who bore testimony to His being real and true. 
    Although we are using 'animals' as witness in the presentation, the closing comments tie in the 
    truth of God's Word and the 'real people' who actually lived and talked to Christ here on earth.   

2. This presentation should be done by six people who enjoy presentations of this kind. It can 
     be presented  by three people, but each person will have to play two parts. This can be done by  
     having signs made that can be 'flipped over' when a reader changes his or her character in the 
     presentation.

3. Most importantly, ... Pray! 


                                                                                                     Sincerely In Christ,
                                                                                                           Dan Conley
                                                                                                      
