- Blue Collar Theology -                                                                                                 by: Dan Conley

"Well!...It's About Time!" 

     Several years ago I did an in depth 'Biblical Time Line'  on Creation and the Flood. While doing this study I found that there were concepts  I had never thought of before, but were critical to our relationship to God, and our understanding of creation. The concept that took 'top billing' was time itself. So, if you will 'give me a little bit of your time', I'll try to explain what this 'time thing' is all about. ...In a timely fashion of course! Also, I am only going to 'highlight' a few points in the creation sequence and leave out major 'chunks' in order to get to the subject matter pertinent to this presentation.
But don't worry! I do believe that God is real and His Word is true. All of it! I'm sure you'll see this by the time we get done.(see?...there it is again... that word time, it sneaks in all the time. hum  Oh well.)
     We think of time in so many different ways that it would be impossible to name all of them in this short presentation. However, just a few of them would have to include; time to get up, ...go to work, ...to get this job done, ...time for myself (good luck!), ...to mow the lawn, ...etc. add infinitum! We also think of time in relation to 'aging'. How old are you? (Don't answer that). How old am I? (I'm not telling.) Our son or daughter is ___ years old. The tree in our back yard is about 65 years old. (It's been drawing social security for the last 3 years.) Obviously, all of these are connected to hours, days, weeks, months and years. More importantly, they are all connected to the original creation outlined in chapter one of Genesis.
     Genesis 1:1-5; "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The earth was without form, and void; and darkness was on the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters. Then God said, "Let there be light"; and there was light. And God saw the light, that it was good; and God divided the light from the darkness. God called the light Day, and the darkness He called Night. So the evening and the morning  were the first day." (NKJV)
     In the verses above we have the creation of 'time'. But look closer, the light mentioned here is not referring to the sun, moon and stars. On the first day of creation God created 'light' itself. Light had never existed until God made it, and this 'light and darkness' is the 'clock' that God started. The rest of God's 'time piece', the sun, moon and stars were created on the fourth day.  All of these were created so that man would be able to tell; "...signs and seasons, and for days and years..." (see Gen.1:14-19) 
     On the sixth day, God creates all the cattle, creeping things and the beasts of the earth, with His final creation being man. Gen. 1:26; "Then God said, 'Let us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness,...'" Man was made in Gods' image. God puts man (Adam) into the garden of Eden, tells him that he can eat of all the fruits of the garden except for one, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. God issues this warning; Gen.2:17; "but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you will surely die." One translation of  the last part of this verse says; "...,dying you shall die." Creation is finished, Adam and Eve are in the Garden of Eden, God declares the seventh day as a day of rest, and He rested.
     The next major event 'recorded' in Biblical History is the Fall of Man Eve being talked into eating the forbidden fruit by what is called a 'serpent', (or 'dragon' ) then she gives some of the fruit to her husband. They suddenly realize they are stark naked and the Lord God has come to the garden for a visit. This is definitely not good timing!
     From this point on, because of their sin, eating of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, Adam and Eve are cursed (along with all of their future descendants) and they will eventually die. 



Gen.3: 17-19 "...'Cursed is the ground for your sake; 
In toil you shall of it all the days of your life. 
Both thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you,
 and you shall eat of the herb of the field.
 In the sweat of your face you shall eat bread
 till you return to the ground, 
For out of it you were taken; 
For dust you are, and to dust you shall return."

     Believe it or not, we have reached the area in Biblical history that I have had a few questions about. The primary question I have had is; Why does it look like God finishes His fantastic creation on day six, and within a very short time, (like the following week) man 'shoots it all to pieces'?      
    This question didn't come about just by the above passage of Scripture. Back in 1650 A.D. James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, Ireland, added up the total number of years people lived, recorded in Genesis and came up with 4004 years. Usher, believed that this number was an accurate number years between the year '0' B.C. and creation. At the time Usher worked out this date there was no reason to call it into question. As a matter of fact, what he found was fantastic considering the time period in which he made this observation. One problem however, with the date of creation that Usher found, is that in the last 100 yrs. (or the twentieth century) there have been a number of significant and legitimate discoveries in archeology and related fields of study that show that there had to of been an advanced civilization that existed long before the time of  4004 B.C. A 'short list' of only a few of these archeological discoveries would include; (There are more on the last page)
- The Great Pyramid in Egypt. 45 stories tall is perfectly aligned with the Polar axis of the earth. East 
  side of pyramid points exactly due East. Built at very early time in Egyptian history.
- The Sumerian King List, preserved on the Weld-Blundell prism, lists eight 'pre-flood' (antediluvian) 
  rulers who reigned over the Mesopotamian cities of Eridu, Badtibira, Larak, Sippar and Shuruppak for 
  the phenomenally long combined time of  241,200 years. The shortest reign is 18,600 years, the 
  longest is 43,200 years. There is no indication of these Kings being replaced due to death. (The time 
  when the Weld-Blundell prism was written dates back to about 2,000 B.C. It was found in the early 
  20th century in Egypt. It is currently in the British Museum.
- (from the science of Dendrochronolgy; In general; the counting and matching of 'tree rings' of older 
  and younger trees in order to build a continuous chronological history of a particular tree species.)
  The Bristlecone Pine, native to the Western United States, with the method of matching overlapping 
  patterns found in different wood samples, bristlecone chronologies have been established almost 9,000  
  years into the past.
      If this last entry is even close to being accurate it would mean that the oldest known bristlecone pine 'seedling' would have started growing at approximately in 6,934 B.C.. This would be 2,825 years before Usher's date of 4004 B.C. for the creation. It is well known that trees only have one 'ring' per year added to them and that the matching of these rings to establish 'dates' can be very accurate. Many times within one or two years.
     The Sumerian King List presents us with an even more unbelievable situation. Were there Kings who reigned for thousands of years? In the analysis of the Kings List, the people evaluating the official translation said; " Looking through these sources we find also that only a single point invites criticism. In the longest of them (the lists) the earliest rulers appear with abnormally long reigns, often as much as several hundred years. At a certain point the reigns then change and become quite normal, keeping within what seems humanly possible. That the immense reigns are unhistorical is obvious."(Thorkild, Jacobsen, The Sumerian King List. Assyriological Studies, XI (Chicago,1939))

     It seems that there are some major hurdles to clear in order to unravel this problem. Or are there? Maybe they're not as big as we think they are. We do know that Gods' Word is true, but at times we humans have misinterpreted what the Scriptures are trying to teach us. That leaves Ushers' date of 4004B.C., the archeological information which doesn't seem to fit and the time between the end of creation and the fall of man.  
     Before I go any further, I need to give you a chance to go find whatever you take for a headache so you can have it close by for this next section. Why? Because I am about to give you a very large 'thinking' headache,... maybe. Also, I want to reassure you that I am not one of those people who likes to 'twist' God's Word to make it fit their own scientific viewpoint, or 'twist' science to make it fit Scripture. Neither one of these are acceptable. I believe God is real and His Word is true. The use of the proper fields of science along with proper Bible study methods can bring about an understanding of God and His creation for times past, present and the future, that are beyond description. So, go find your aspirin, take a little time to pray before moving to this next part and get ready to think from 'Gods' side of the fence'. Headache Alley here we come!
     According to the Biblical record in Genesis chapters 3 to 5 there is no clear statement that would tell us how much time elapsed between creation and the fall of man. At the same time it is difficult to believe that Gods' creation could or would be destroyed so soon after being created. One thing is certain, however, the record of how long Adam lived before having his son Seth is 130 years  after the fall (see Gen. 5:3&4) Also, Eve had conceived and bore Cain and Able sometime after the fall, but there is no time given in order to know how long it was after the fall that she gave birth. Because all the records concerning the life span of Adam, the birth of Seth and more are recorded some time after the fall, it is resonable to conclude that Ushers' date should refer to the Fall and not to the time of creation.
     The Bristlecone chronology, going back to 6,934 B.C., which is also 2,825 before the fall, should be considered a valuable source of information due to the methods used to determine dates in history. As mentioned above; "It is well known that trees only have one 'ring' per year added to them and that the matching of these rings to establish 'dates' can be very accurate. Many times within one or two years."
Trees are like silent chronometers (clocks) measuring each year one ring at a time and keeping track of  how much rain they had each year or how dry it was. It would be difficult to argue against the dates that the Dendrochronology records provide. Even if they were 100 years off, they would still be placed before the fall of man. 
     The Sumerian King list dating back 241,200 years before the flood should not be dismissed to soon either. There is something that



 



     
          When I first started this presentation, I told you that it was about 'time'. That is still true, even though right now it looks more like a giant wet 'hairball'! So let's unravel this mystery and see what is the truth and what is error.
          First, there are two places where we may find human error. The first is the 4004 B.C. as the date of creation that Usher developed. His 4004 B.C. is within about 100 years ( about 4100 B.C.)of what other people have found and that is not a problem. The only questionable item about Ushers' date is that his should have been to the 'fall of man' and not the creation.

- Carnac, Brittany, France. Prehistoric menhirs and dolmans, thousands of which cover 15 miles of 
  Brittany coast.
- Olmec heads excavated in San Lorenzo, Mexico are one of the New World's greatest and oldest 
  mysteries.
- Giant stone spheres of unknown age, originally found in the jungles of Costa Rico and more recently in 
  Mexico, Aruba and Haiti, are exactly round.
- Non-Arctic animals unearthed in Alaska, Arctic Canada, Siberia, includes prehistoric horses, tigers 
  and mastodons.
- Prehistoric buildings at Point Barrows and Port Hope, Alaska which show the existence of an 
  advanced civilization.
- Ground markings in Nasca Valley and Desert that are so large they can only be seen from the sky and 
  were found only after the airplanes were invented.

